The Project Gutenberg eBook of Indian Palmistry
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Indian Palmistry

Author: Mrs. J. B. Dale

Release date: July 8, 2016 [eBook #52523]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INDIAN PALMISTRY ***

                           INDIAN PALMISTRY.


                                   BY

                            MRS. J. B. DALE.


                                LONDON:
     THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, 7, DUKE STREET, ADELPHI, W.C.

                               NEW YORK:
                     THE PATH, 144, MADISON AVENUE.

                                MADRAS:
                 PROPRIETORS OF THE THEOSOPHIST, ADYAR.

                                 1895.

[Illustration:

  PLATE I.—THE REFERENCE HAND.
]




                                PREFACE.


Cheiromancy, the art of foretelling the events of life by the lineaments
of the hand, derived its name from the Greek word _cheiros_, the palm,
and _manteia_, to foretell, whence it has been vulgarly called
Palmistry—as it is named in a recent Act of Parliament to forbid its
practice for gain or reward. In Coleman's _Mythology of the Hindoos_, p.
202, it is written: "On the Buddha's foot is the mark called the
'chakravarti,' wheel or discus, which should have been on the palm of
the hand, by which the sages at his birth divined that he would rise to
considerable eminence." He says (p. 19): "Various data have been
assigned to the period of Buddha's existence. The most correct seems to
be about 550 B.C., whence, as the sages practised cheiromancy at
Buddha's birth, its existence must have been much earlier known among
the Indians." "In the year 1652," writes Zadkiel, "the celebrated
astrologer, Geo. Wharton, Esq., published a translation of 'a matchless
piece' as he terms it, on the subject, written in Latin by Dr. J.
Rothman." Since that period the art of cheiromancy has gradually fallen
into disuse, chiefly from the extensive nonsense published by recent
writers. One of the writers makes a shallow attempt to disprove the
connection which exists between astrology and palmistry, while another
says it is based on the principles of the Kabalah, the latter being
nothing more than a mnemonical system of astrology. From the writings of
Dr. J. Rothman and Geo. Wharton, Esq., I propose now to give, together
with some of the choicest of those of the East, the principal matter,
and to explain in the ordinary language used by palmisters such points
as may require elucidation. Mr. Wharton, a careful student in these
subjects, clearly proves that palmistry can only act in accordance with
astrology, and that the art of cheiromancy cannot be relied upon beyond
the period of from one to two years at most, for he observes in his
preface, "What more convincing than if, by inspection made into the hand
of any man, I truly pronounce this or that planet essentially dignified
or angular in his geniture, or in such or such a position with other
planets or stars, another unfortunate, afflicted or defected? Or if, on
the contrary, by looking first into the geniture and considering therein
the several positions of the planets and their configurations one to
another and with other stars, I tell him, and that distinctly and truly,
the lines and signatures engraven upon his head or hand—what, I say, is
or can be more satisfactory than this to rational men, as touching the
power and influence of the planets and stars upon these inferiors, and
consequently of the lawful use and truth of the science called
astrology, cheiromancy and metoposcopia, between which three sciences
there appear to be such a secret coherence and harmony?"

It is also written in the _Book of Job_, xxxvii. 7: "In the hand of all
men he shall put a mark that everyone may know his own work"; but in our
translation of the _Bible_ it is written as follows: "In the hand of all
men he putteth a mark that every man may know his own work." This alone
proves that Job believed in this science.

The author does not claim that there is anything new in this work,
although the method of translating and setting may be original.




                          REFERENCES TO HAND.


                                 No. 1.

_Name._—Mount of Jupiter.

_Location._—Root of forefinger.

_Interpretation._—When very fully shown denotes pride, tyranny; when
deficient in size denotes idleness and vulgarity; when there are
concentric circles shown by the pores of the skin, here they indicate
sure success in religion, marriage and monetary matters, ambition;
broken circles or elongated, slightly less powerful; entirely void, no
success thereby.


                                 No. 2.

_Name._—Mount of Saturn.

_Location._—Root of middle finger.

_Interpretation._—When fully marked denotes wisdom, prudence; when very
full, taciturnity, sadness; when concentric circles are placed here
success in all Saturnian affairs; when absent or elongated the person
will never make much headway with such things and persons.


                                 No. 3.

_Name._—Mount of the Sun, "Apollo."

_Location._—Root of ring finger.

_Interpretation._—When prominent it gives art, genius, intelligence;
when very full, denotes a greedy and untruthful disposition; when flat
or small, then it causes the person to be dull; when concentric circles
appear here, the person will be very powerful, have riches and honour by
the state, or marry a high-born person; elongated or none, shows the
person will have mean preferment, or none, as the case may be.


                                 No. 4.

_Name._—Mount of Mercury.

_Location._—Root of little finger.

_Interpretation._—When prominent and full, and with concentric circles
thereon, it denotes science, inventiveness, wit and success in all
Mercurial matters, as writings, professions, especially church and law,
and journeys; when very large and with elongated circles, it denotes
theft, lying, cunning; when flat or none, it shows a negative life, and
unfortunate in all above.


                                 No. 5.

_Name._—Girdle of Venus.

_Location._—A curved line from root of forefinger to root of little
finger.

_Interpretation._—When this line is clear it shows a natural desire for
the opposite sex; when double it denotes an intemperate and lustful
life; when broken, it shows terrible loss and infamy through lusts, a
filthy person.


                                 No. 6.

_Name._—Via Combusta.

_Location._—Extends through hollow of hand to mount of middle finger.

_Interpretation._—See Lines (8) page 36.


                                 No. 7.

_Name._—Via Solis.

_Location._—A curved line running from root of ring finger to the mount
of the Moon.

_Interpretation._—When straight and uniformly composed and well
coloured, it promises the favour of great men and great honours; if
dissected or uneven judge the contrary, or the frowns or ill favour of
great people, with impediments in life or envy.


                                 No. 8.

_Name._—Line of Fortune.

_Location._—A line extending from the mount of Jupiter to the mount of
Mercury.

_Interpretation._—When long and with incisures, denotes that the
principal members of the body are strong, constancy; if short or
crooked, the contrary; if severed, the same; when it stops at the mount
of Saturn, it shows a vain lying person; if it branches on mount of
Jupiter it denotes honours; if single or without branches, it shows
poverty and want.


                                 No. 9.

_Name._—Liver line.

_Location._—A curved line running through the palm of the hand, between
the line of Fortune and the Life line.

_Interpretation._—When straight and not dissected by obscure little
lines, denotes a healthy body; if extending only to the hollow of the
hand, or short, it denotes a short life, or full of disease; the longer
this line, the longer may the life be; if cut at end poverty in old age.


                                No. 10.

_Name._—Line of Life.

_Location._—A curved line running round the root of the thumb.

_Interpretation._—When broad and uniform, denotes a long and healthy
life, and but few diseases; if slender, short or cut, or with little
obscure lines running through, it denotes feebleness of body, sickness,
short life, except line be strong; if sloping nicely to Liver line, and
beautified in the angle with parallels or little crosses, it shows a
good wit and even temper.


                                No. 11.

_Name._—Line of Saturn.

_Location._—A line extending from the wrist lines up to middle finger.

_Interpretation._—If it extend to the middle finger it indicates
profound meditations, and if fortunate, events in counsels and actions;
if short (without other testimony) misfortunes; if bent towards the
mount of the Moon, in the hollow of the hand, imprisonment.


                                No. 12.

_Name._—Line of the Head and Brain, called by some the line of Health.

_Location._—A line running from the wrist, or line of Saturn, and
extending up to the mount of Mercury.

_Interpretation._—If this line be uniform and not intersected, it forms
with the line of Life and Liver line (sometimes called the Head line) a
triangle on the plane of Mars, if of good colour, it denotes prudence,
manly wit and fair fortune; the more perfect this triangle, the better
will be the person's wit and courage; if obtuse it shows an evil nature
and a rude man; no triangle shows a fool or a knave.


                                No. 13.

_Name._—Line of the Moon.

_Location._—A line running from the line of Saturn and line of the Brain
to the mount of the moon called sometimes the Via Lactea.

_Interpretation._—This line being uniformly composed, proportionate and
continued, denotes fortunate journeys both by land and sea; also a good
brain, the favour of women (the mount of Venus being also unafflicted),
a composed and graceful speech; if it be cut or distorted it argues
infelicity and proneness to lies; if whole and ascending up to little
finger it denotes great happiness.


                                No. 14.

_Name._—Mount of the Moon.

_Location._—The outside part of hand, opposite to root of thumb, between
mount of Mercury and wrist.

_Interpretation._—Imagination, refinement, poetry; if very large or full
it denotes despair, caprice and almost lunacy; when flat and hollow,
denotes dulness, want of speech, positiveness.


                                No. 15.

_Name._—Plane and place of Mars. The mount of Mars.

_Location._—The place of Mars is twice represented, one on the side of
the palm by the mount of Mars, and the other in the palm between the
line of Life and the Liver line, called the plane or place of Mars.

_Interpretation._—The mount of Mars shows courage; when in excess,
passion; when small, temerity.

(_Vide_ marks, etc., specially numbered.)


                                No. 16.

_Name._—Mount of Venus.

_Location._—In the root of the thumb.

_Interpretation._—Love of beauty and pleasure; where large, inconstancy,
coquetry; when small, coldness.


                                No. 17.

_Name._—Dragon lines or Bracelets.

_Location._—Lines to be found on the wrist.

_Interpretation._—If double or triple and forming a right and continuous
tract, it shows good composure of body; thrice, indicates health, wealth
and prosperity; a star or cross here shows tranquillity in old age; if a
line extends to the mount of Moon or Mercury from Dragon lines, it shows
esteem and life in a foreign country.


                                No. 18.

_Name._—Plane of Mensa, or place of Fortune.

_Location._—The space between the line of Fortune and the Liver line.

_Interpretation._—Great and broad and forming a nice figure, it declares
a liberal man, magnanimous and long-lived; if small and narrow, it
argues slender fortune, niggardliness and fearfulness; a star or cross
in this space, clear and well-proportioned, especially under the mount
of the Sun, shows honours and dignities to follow.


                                No. 19.

_Name._—Egyptian Staff.

_Location._—Just below chain of Fortune.

_Interpretation._—Great renown in antiquities—a great commander and
ofttimes a great statesman, a lover of ancient research.


                                No. 20.

_Name._—Chain of Fortune.

_Location._—Small crosses or stars between the line of Life and the
Liver line, under the mount of Jupiter.

_Interpretation._—These denote wit and an even nature; riches and
honours, or wealth by position of noted kind.


                                No. 21.

_Name._—Sun place.

_Location._—A small circle on the line of Life opposite to the mount of
the Moon.

_Interpretation._—The loss of eyesight; two circles, the loss of both
eyes.


                                No. 22.

_Name._—Envy line.

_Location._—A line running from the root of the thumb, near the Dragon
lines, to the line of Saturn.

_Interpretation._—Denotes envy.


                                No. 23.

_Name._—Perilous line.

_Location._—A small line running from the Life line and passing through
the point formed by the cutting of line of Saturn and Liver line.

_Interpretation._—This indicates perils of all kinds, and disease, and
sometimes sudden death or misfortune.


                                No. 24.

_Name._—Line of Friendship.

_Location._—A small line starting from the line of Life, about midway,
and passing through the Saturn and Liver lines, forming a small
triangle, and extending to the mount of the Sun.

_Interpretation._—This shows honours and favours from great ladies of
rank and fortune.


                                No. 25.

_Name._—Cross of Indigence.

_Location._—A star on the Liver line or natural mean, near or on mount
of the Moon.

_Interpretation._—Poverty in old age.


                                No. 26.

_Name._—Path of Mars.

_Location._—A small line running midway from line of Life to plane of
Mars with a small star on or near the end.

_Interpretation._—Hurts and wounds.


                                No. 27.

_Name._—Dragon's Head.

_Location._—A star on Dragon line or Bracelets.

_Interpretation._—Tranquillity in life, in old age.


                                No. 28.

_Name._—Dragon's Tail.

_Location._—A line running from second Bracelet into the mount of Venus.

_Interpretation._—Adversities from kindred or wife.


                                No. 29.

_Name._—Line of Mars.

_Location._—A line running parallel with the line of Life on mount of
Venus.

_Interpretation._—This augments and strengthens the things signified by
the line of Life; it particularly promises good success in war and a
robust constitution.


                                No. 30.

_Name._—Mars Cross.

_Location._—Cross or star on the mount of Mars.

_Interpretation._—Fortunate journeys.


                                No. 31.

_Name._—Oracle of Jove.

_Location._—The sign Jupiter under the mount or on the mount of Apollo.

_Interpretation._—Denotes honours and ecclesiastical dignities.


                                No. 32.

_Name._—Line of Calamity.

_Location._—A small line running from line of Life up through second
joint of thumb.

_Interpretation._—This signifies a violent death and danger from married
women.


                                No. 33.

_Name._—Cross bars.

_Location._—Small lines on the second joint of thumb.

_Interpretation._—This is an indication of contention and brawling;
small hair lines running horizontally to thumb shows riches in second
part of life.


                                No. 34.

_Name._—Girdle of Pollux.

_Location._—A ring round the thumb.

_Interpretation._—This is an indication of hanging.


                                No. 35.

_Name._—First phalanx of forefinger.

_Location._—Small lines running parallel with joint.

_Interpretation._—Indication of inheritance. This phalanx hollow or
curved upwards indicates avarice; if turned backwards, extravagance.


                                No. 36.

_Name._—Second phalanx of forefinger.

_Location._—Small lines in the centre running vertical to joints.

_Interpretation._—Indicates many children.


                                No. 37.

_Name._—Third phalanx of forefinger.

_Location._—Small lines running vertical to joints.

_Interpretation._—Denotes a jovial disposition. This finger thick at the
root denotes a greedy appetite.


                                No. 38.

_Name._—Small star or cross.

_Location._—On third phalanx of forefinger.

_Interpretation._—Shows an unchaste and lascivious life.


                                No. 39.

_Name._—Small star.

_Location._—On second phalanx of middle finger.

_Interpretation._—Denotes melancholy; a star near middle of third
phalanx denotes unhappiness.


                                No. 40.

_Name._—A line with star at bottom.

_Location._—A small line running throughout middle finger, with a star
on third phalanx.

_Interpretation._—Denotes folly and madness.


                                No. 41.

_Name._—Small lines running vertical to joint.

_Location._—Second phalanx of ring finger.

_Interpretation._—Indicates fame, especially if a straight and
well-defined line passes up the middle of the finger.


                                No. 42.

_Name._—Small cross bars.

_Location._—Third phalanx of ring finger.

_Interpretation._—Honours and riches.


                                No. 43.

_Name._—Small cross or star.

_Location._—On mount of Mercury close to joint.

_Interpretation._—Eloquence.


                                No. 44.

_Name._—Two small stars or indented line.

_Location._—On mount of Mercury, one below the other, or a clear
indented line on mount of Apollo.

_Interpretation._—The first indicates a brilliant mind. The line on
mount of Apollo also shows a noted and brilliant mind, but the loss of a
dear male friend, sometimes death of wife.


                                No. 45.

_Name._—Cross bars.

_Location._—On second phalanx of little finger.

_Interpretation._—Shows a thief or a very deceitful person.


                                No. 46.

_Name._—Marriage lines.

_Location._—Small lines on outside of hand on mount of Mercury.

_Interpretation._—These, according to their number, denote the number of
husbands or wives should the widow line also appear; without it they may
mean lovers.


                                 No. 47

_Name._—Crest of Hermes.

_Location._—Small crosses or star on third phalanx of little finger,
especially in the centre.

_Interpretation._—Shows ingenuity and eloquence.


                                No. 48.

_Name._—Small concentric circles formed by pores of the skin.

_Location._—On first phalanx of all fingers.

_Interpretation._—Denotes that the person will be always earning or
inheriting money all his life, and in fact it is one of the most
successful signs in the hand for pecuniary success.


                                No. 49.

_Location._—On Mounts.

_Name._—Concentric.

_Interpretation._—The same on the mounts indicate money by or through
persons or things indicated by the mount of the fingers, on the
forefinger, a wealthy partner; on the mount of Saturn, wealth by lands,
house property, legacies; on the ring finger by successful business, or
profession and fame; on the mount of Mercury by writings, by profession,
by eloquence, etc. Should these assume an elongated form, as seen on
middle finger, then, if unbroken, the person will succeed by labour and
many difficulties; if none appear, then they will never succeed in
pecuniary matters, unless the hand is otherwise very strong.


                                No. 50.

_Name._—Lapis Lazuli.

_Location._—Tip of middle finger.

_Interpretation._—Same as above on mount of Saturn—but in foreign
countries or from abroad.


                                No. 51.

_Name._—Lapis Lazuli.

_Location._—On mount of Saturn or middle finger.

_Interpretation._—Same as No. 50.


                                No. 52.

_Name._—Shell form shown by pores of skin.

_Location._—On first phalanx of little finger.

_Interpretation._—This is perhaps the best means of success, as shown
above, in writing and speaking, etc., if other testimonies concur, but I
prefer the complete circle.


                                No. 53.

_Name._—Corn or diamond loops.

_Location._—On joints of fingers.

_Interpretation._—Should the lines on the joints, between the phalanges
of the fingers, take the form of a barleycorn or diamond, the person may
expect many and unexpected advantages, but much depends on the sum of
these lines when counted.


                                No. 54.

_Name._—Luna lines.

_Location._—Near mount of Moon on outside of hand, below the Liver or
Father line.

_Interpretation._—Aptitude for travelling, a sailor, quietness,
contentment, poetic imagination when regular; cross bars here give
discontent, sometimes suicide, a morbid imagination.


                                No. 55.

_Name._—Line of intuition.

_Location._—A line running from the Liver line to the mount of the Moon.

_Interpretation._—This shows poetic intelligence, seldom found except in
highly imaginative and intellectual persons.


                                No. 56.

_Name._—Line of Temper.

_Location._—A line running vertically from mount of Mars to mount of
Moon.

_Interpretation._—This denotes determination and decision.


                         A SUMMARY OF JUDGMENT.

(1) Observe the kind of hands from the front or inside.

Short hands denote an impulsive judgment without analysis.

Smooth hands denote impression, ability, inspiration, intuition.

Hard, firm hands denote great energy and perseverance.

Soft, loose hands denote a kind of debility or laziness, a
disinclination to work.

Knotted hands denote reflection, order, success.

(2) Observe the fingers.

_Pointed._—Forefinger (first), intuitive; middle finger (second),
frivolous, light-hearted, gay; ring finger (third), artistic, testy,
nice, refined; little finger (fourth), eloquent.

_Square._—Forefinger (first), truthful, cautious; middle finger
(second), grave, thoughtful; ring finger (third), reasonable, a thinker;
little finger (fourth), judicious.

_Spatulated._—Forefinger (first), mystic, delighting in occult studies;
middle finger (second), morbid, fanciful; ring finger (third), dramatic,
sympathetic; little finger (fourth), mechanical.

(3) Look at the nails on the hands.

1.—Narrow, indicate an irritable temper or aspiring spirit.

2.—Round and full, indicate learning and liberal views.

3.—Small, indicate pride, stubbornness, narrowness and bigotry.

4.—Broad and flat, indicate a mild and timorous disposition.

5.—Filbert-shaped, indicate refinement and courteous manners.

_Note._—When the hand is allowed to open freely, the space between the
first and second fingers, farthest apart, denotes independence of
thought; third and fourth, independence of action, and if both are very
wide apart, originality and self-reliance.

If the thumb inclines inward, avarice; outward, generosity.

(4) Observe the length and depth of the lines.

(5) The quality, whether they are crooked or straight.

(6) Observe whether they touch or cut other lines.

(7) Observe whether they are touched or cut by other lines.

(8) Their place and position.

_Note._—The lines are sometimes lengthened until certain years of our
life, while others are shortened. At one time they may become pale, at
another they become notably clear and red. The minor marks, such as are
found on the mounts, sometimes quite vanish, and at other times they
will assume different shapes and colours. Therefore the most studious in
palmistry cannot attain a complete knowledge of the events of a life at
once, because they come and go as nature, or the circumstances of life,
change and twist, but can only read for a year or so in advance. These
changes are caused, as before stated, by the progressions and changing
of the laws relating to nature, of which we are a part.


                          THE HAND TO EXAMINE.

The general rule in the East is that the right palm of the male and the
left palm of the female ought to be examined. In either case take the
hand in which the signs and lines are clearly shown. If they concur in
both hands and appear clear and nicely marked they declare a constancy
of fortune and health, etc. In the male generally the right hand is the
fate hand or the positive hand, that is, events about to happen; while
the left denotes the negative or those events which have come to pass or
been accomplished by the person, or those just passing away. Judge the
converse in the female hands.


  SIGNIFICATION OF ANIMALS, FLOWERS AND PROMISCUOUS MARKS FOUND ON THE
                                 HAND.

These are principally formed by the smaller lines running with the pores
of the skin. Great care must therefore be taken in determining these
forms, because very much depends on their position. The numbers herein
referred to have reference to Plate II of the hand which I have set
apart for the express purpose of showing these marks and signs.

The first space of the hand near to the mounts is that part which has
principally to show the animal passions—lusts and intrigues.

[Illustration:

  PLATE II.
]

The second space, or the part of the hand between the girdle of Venus
and the Table line, deals more specifically with love affairs or the
spiritual side, while the former treats more on the physical plane.

These two, therefore, taken together, may be considered the moral region
of the hand.

The next space between the Table line and the Liver line may be called
the mental and social region.

The one following this may be called the commercial region or the wealth
generally of the person.

That space enclosed by the line of Life is the artistic or dramatic
region.

The right hand side of the hand separated by the line of Saturn denotes
the positive nature, while the left hand portion is the negative or
imaginative nature of the individual.

If a fish or a similar figure be found at the root of the hand (No. 1)
it signifies great success in the world—riches and many children.

If a lotus flower or like-shaped figure be here, the person, if a
female, will be sure to become a great lady, in fact almost a queen. If
the same be on a male hand he will be sure to be renowned and great (No.
2).

A serpent found here or on the wrist just above the Bracelet and near to
the line of Saturn, the man will become a great warrior or hero (Nos. 1
and 3).

An octagonal figure placed between the line of Life and the Liver line
will cause the person to be burdened with the possession of landed
estates (No. 4).

If conch, or marine shells, or any circular figure be found here (No. 5)
they presage that the person will be a learned man, especially if they
should be found on the first phalanx of the little finger (No. 6), on
the mount of Mercury (No. 7), or on the mount of the Moon (No. 8).

Should the sign of a flag be found here, and particularly on the mount
of Mercury (No. 7) or on the palm of the hand (No. 9), the person will
be a philosopher and a great thinker.

A trident (No. 10), the three-pronged sceptre of Neptune or similar
figure, the person rises to great fame, almost a prince or princess. If
the trident be formed, but somewhat indistinct, he will not rise so
high, but sure to have very important appointments and be attached to
royalty. He will also be very kind, generous, and likely to acquire
fame.

If in the male hand, or even on the female hand, there be anything like
a spear or bow and arrow the person is sure to get a throne (No. 11);
and if all three, bow, arrow and lance together be there, the person is
sure to be a king or queen (No. 12).

Should the sign of a wheel and flag come together on the same hand the
person will have riches and power, respect among his fellow-men, will be
a great ruler or prime minister, and be noted or celebrated for his
wisdom and goodness (No. 13).

If the sign of an elephant, which of itself is good (No. 14), or the
sign of an earring (No. 15) and wheel (No. 16) appear on the same hand
together, the person is likely to be an emperor or great personage.

A hill (No. 17) or wristlet (No. 18) like a bough or something like the
head of a man (No. 19), or a pitcher (No. 20), the person is almost sure
to rise to the exalted position of a minister of state.

If the sign of a barleycorn be found on the flat part of the thumb the
person will spend life very happily and go through life easily (No. 21).
Should the barley appear on the mount of Mars, in the centre of the
hand, the person will be very intellectual, respectable and wise (No.
22). Should the form of the barley be found under any two fingers,
especially on the mount of Saturn, the possessor will lead a happy life,
honourable, have a good partner in marriage and have many children (No.
23).

If the line of the Heart (or the line of Fortune in India) (No. 25),
extend only to the mount of Apollo (the Sun), the person will scarcely
live ten years. And should this line be broken in many places the person
will die by drowning. But if another smaller line appear running
parallel with the Heart line and which extends only to the mount of
Apollo (No. 26), the person will meet his death either by a fall from a
house or a tree. Should, however, this line extend from the outside part
of the hand to the mount of Jupiter, the life will be long and good, if
not broken.

If a line rises from the mount of Venus to the first phalanx of the
thumb he will be a commander of a large army (No. 27).

A vertical line on the mount of Jupiter, the possessor will be a great
diplomatist, but an irreligious person (No. 28). If this line appear on
the mount of Saturn, he will be a prosperous man with a beautiful wife
and have many children (No. 29).

A line under the Sun denotes a trades person with a long life, but only
rises to the middle class (No. 30).

If a vertical and well-defined line appear on the mount of Mercury (No.
31), the person is likely to lead a long life in a foreign country.

If the line of the Heart (Fortune line) goes to the mount of Saturn, he
will live thirty years.

If the Life line and the Liver line (called the Head line in England) be
separated entirely, the female will either be seduced before marriage or
have illegitimate children, or in both sexes be illegitimate themselves.

If the palm of the hand be filled with numerous and indistinct marks or
lines the person leads a very unhappy life.

If a person have single lines or marks thus == between the phalanges on
the joints of the fingers and when counted together make twelve, they
will be happy, prosperous and rich for the most part of life.

If they make thirteen he will be very unhappy.

If they make fifteen he will be dishonest or a thief.

If they make sixteen he will be a great gambler and cheat.

If they make seventeen he will be guilty of debauchery and much
wickedness.

If they make eighteen the person will be very fortunate and religious.

If they make nineteen he will be very clever and respectable.

If they make twenty an enthusiast in religion.

If they make twenty-one he will be a great poet and become famous.

When these lines are joined at the ends and form the shape of a
barleycorn or wheat, the fame and learning of the person depend on the
number; one would be weak, two strong, and so on. If the lines just over
the mounts be united at the ends, as described above, the person in
whose hands the same appear will have riches and wealth, but generally
by marriage. If they be united over all four fingers the person will be
very rich, over three less wealthy and so on.

Small concentric circles, formed principally by the pores of the skin,
on the points or first phalanges of the fingers and thumb, and these be
not broken and appear the same on all four fingers and thumb, the person
will be extremely famous and very powerful.

Also on the outer ridge of the hand will be found various marks.

All the marks above the Heart line indicate the number of wives, and all
below the number of children, the short one indicates those that will
probably die.

The line around the lower joint of the thumb just above the mount of
Venus, if well-defined and clear, and particularly if they bend thus ‿
on the mount, denote the person to be famous as a sculptor or painter.

If on the mounts of Jupiter, Saturn, Apollo, Mercury, there be found
concentric circles, and very complete, and in no way broken, the man
will attain great wealth and power through marriage or marry some noted
person.

If at the end of the Hepatica or Liver line there so be an opening like
the tail of a fish, the person will have great happiness and riches.


                               THE LINES.

(1) The line of Life, which ought to be called the line of the Heart,
embraces the root of the thumb.

(2) The Liver or natural mean runs straight through the middle of the
hand.

(3) The line of the Head or Brain rises before the line of Life and
extends towards the mount of Mercury, forming a triangular figure in the
palm of the hand—the great sign of success and brilliancy.

[Illustration:

  PLATE III.—THE LINES AND MOUNTS ON THE HAND.
]

(4) The line of Fortune or Title line, which begins under the root of
the little finger and extends towards the forefinger.

(5) The Bracelet lines at the root of the hand, stretch across the
wrist, and may be single, double or treble, etc.

(6) The Sun line, called for clearness Via Solis, is a right line which
begins at the mount of Apollo and stretches into the hollow of the hand
after curving towards the mount of the Moon.

(7) The line of the Moon, called the Via Lactea, runs upwards from the
line of Saturn, through the mount of the Moon.

(8) The line of Fortune or Saturn begins at the wrist lines, extends
through the hollow of the hand to the mount of the middle finger. If
this line be cut or severed it is called the Via Combusta; when this
line assumes a double line in the middle of the palm it is said that you
do more good to others than yourself.


                              THE MOUNTS.

These are the fleshy or prominent parts under the fingers, called:

(1) The mount of Venus, in the root of the thumb.

(2) The mount of Jupiter, in the root of the forefinger.

(3) The mount of Saturn, in the root of the middle finger.

(4) The mount of Sun (Apollo), in the root of the ring finger.

(5) The mount of Mercury, in the root of the little finger.


                           THE LINE OF LIFE.

This line, broad, uniform, lively colour and a good length, denotes the
party to be long lived and subject to few diseases. This line slender,
short, cut or broken, or with obscure little lines, or pale, or blackish
colour, denotes feebleness of body, sickness, short life. This line
sloping nicely to the Liver line and forming a nice angle with parallel
or little crosses at the juncture, shows good wit and even temper, a
sharp quick person and business man.

Little branches in the upper part branching towards the Liver line
signify riches and honour. These little lines running the opposite way
towards the wrist denote poverty, deceit, unfaithful servants. Little
confused hair lines in this line signify diseases.


                            TIME OF EVENTS.

Should they be found in the lower part of the hand the good or bad will
be in early age. In the middle of the hand towards the hollow, in the
middle age. If towards the Liver line, in declining age.

Danger of death is threatened if this line be broken.

[Illustration:

  PLATE IV.—THE LINE OF LIFE.
]

To find the exact age this line may be divided into seventy parts, each
part counting one year of life.

The character ☉ in this line shows loss of an eye. This character double
denotes the loss of both eyes.

A line ascending from the line of Life (beneath the angle formed by the
line of Life and the Liver line) to the line of Saturn, denotes an
envious man, and shows also a perilous disease in that part wherein it
touches the vital. So much the worse if it cut the line of Life or
severs the mount.

A line passing from the line of Life to the ring finger promises honours
to follow by means of a lady of rank, or gain through favour.

The line of Life thicker than ordinary at the end under the forefinger
shows a laborious old age.


                            THE LIVER LINE.

This line being straight and not dissected by obscure little lines,
denotes a healthy body.

If it be short or broken and does not reach beyond the hollow of the
hand, it denotes diseases and a short life.

The longer this line, the greater may the life be warranted.

If cut at the end by a small intervening line, it threatens poverty in
old age.

When this line is very close to the line of Life, it denotes diseases of
the heart, as palpitation, syncope, etc.

If the space between the line of Life and the Liver line, especially of
the space between the Liver line and the line of Fortune, be broad, it
shows prodigality.

If the Liver line turn and wind several ways, unequal, of a different
colour and dissected, it bodes disease or obstruction in the liver, and
hence the disease arising from its weakness. It also denotes
covetousness and depravity of nature and wit; more especially if from
under the region of the middle finger it extends towards the line of
Life, thus making a short or narrow triangle. Where it is well drawn and
of a good clear colour, it is a sign of a cheerful and ingenious
disposition.

If this line have a sister line it promises inheritances.

If continued with some little hard knots, it forebodes manslaughter
either perpetrated or to be perpetrated, according to the number of
those knots.

If a cross be found therein, under the region of the middle finger, it
promises death at hand.

If it ends with a fork towards the mount of the Moon, it is a sign of
hypocrisy and evil manners.

When it bends towards the Mensal it is a token of a slanderous tongue
and envy.

When it projects a remarkable branch through the line of Life unto the
mount of Venus, and cuts or touches the line of Mars, especially if the
line be of a ruddy colour, it warns to be guarded against thieves and
intimates, fraud and deceit of enemies. This same branch shows also
great heat of the liver, coming from Mars, whereby life is endangered.


                    THE LINE OF THE HEAD AND BRAIN.

If this line (ascending from its place with uniform proportion) connect
the line of the Liver and Life in a triangular form, having a lively
colour and not intersected, it declares a person of admirable prudence,
and of a manly wit and fair fortune. The more perfect this triangle, the
better shall the temper, wit and courage be. But if it be obtuse, it
argues an evil disposed nature and a rude man. If there be no triangle,
much worse, a fool, a prodigal and a liar, and frequently a short life.

The nearer it approaches a right angle, and not acute, the better the
person. But when the angle formed be very acute, especially when the
lines of Liver and Life touch under the region of the middle finger, it
argues covetousness. If not under the middle finger, it shows a keen,
sharp and powerful wit, also a clever business person.

The left angle (male hand), if it be made upon the natural mean in the
mount of the Moon, and be a right angle by the line passing to the mount
of Mercury, confirms goodness, and quality of the intellect.

When the line of the Head and Brain throws out unequal and incomposed
branches towards the mount of the Moon, thereby making unusual
characters, it denotes in men weakness of brain and dangerous sea
voyages; but in a woman frequent sorrows of mind and difficulties in
child-bearing. Equal lines thus projected presage the contrary in both
sexes, viz., in men, a clear and well-composed brain and frequent
voyages, and in women cheerfulness and felicity in child-bearing.

The line of the Head has this peculiarity; if it project a cleft or a
manifest star upwards to the cavea martis, it signifies boldness and
courage; but if it let fall the same downwards, thefts and
deceitfulness.

When the line of the Head is joined to the line of the Dragon's Head it
promises a prudent and pleasant old age. The same throwing a branch in
the shape of a fork towards the place of the line of Fortune signifies
subtlety in managing affairs and craftiness either to do good or evil.

If this character ⊕ appears in or near the fork it gives riches and
honours by means of ingenuity and arts.


                          THE LINE OF FORTUNE.

This line is also called the Table line. This line, when it is long
enough and without incisures, argues a due strength in the principal
members of man and denotes constancy. Judge the contrary if this line be
short or crooked or is severed. When this line terminates under the
mount of Saturn, it shows a vain and lying fellow.

If it projects small branches unto the mount of Jupiter, it produces
honours. Should this be a simple line on the mount of Jupiter, and void
of any good marks or branches, it is a sign of poverty and want.

If it severs the mount of Jupiter, cruelty of mind and excessive wrath.

If it throws a branch between the forefinger and the middle, it
threatens to a man a wound in the head, but to a woman danger in
child-bearing.

A small line running from the line of Fortune to the space between the
middle and ring finger, denotes sorrow and labour.

A line passing from the Liver line to the line of Fortune, forming an
acute angle, brings sorrow and labour.

Should there be no Liver line and the line of Fortune connected by a
small line to the line of Life, it threatens a deadly wound.

The absence of the line of Fortune shows a malevolent, contentious,
faithless, inconstant person and of base conditions.

Confused little lines in the line of Fortune denote sickness, and if
under Mercury, in the first age; under the mount of the Sun in manhood;
under the middle finger in old age.

When certain points are observed in this line they argue lust and vigour
of body.


                          THE BRACELETS LINE.

If this be double or treble and forming a right and continuous tract, it
promises a good composure of body.

The line which is nearest to the thumb, of a good lively colour, and
unbroken, promises riches. Should this line be broken in the middle,
crooked and very pale, it denotes debility of body and a want of all
things.

A cross or star placed here shows tranquillity of life in old age.

If there be a star single or double or any lines near the mount of the
thumb, in women they denote misfortune and infamy.

A line passing from the Dragon line through the mount of Venus, presages
adversities either by means of some kindred or a wife.

A line running from the Dragon line to the mount of the Moon shows
adversities and private enemies; crooked or distorted it increases the
evil and shows long servitude.

This line being clear and straight and extending as far as the region of
the Moon, presages many journeys both by land and sea.

If this line continues to the mount of Mercury it argues that the man
will live in a foreign country in great esteem. If it extends to the
Liver line it shows an honest behaviour and a long life. If to the mount
of the Sun, single or double, it denotes great good and enables the man
to govern and rule in great affairs. If it pass to the mount of Mercury
it betokens a man fit for many things. If it does not extend to the
mount of Mercury, but is broken about the middle and ends beneath that
mount, it denotes an untruthful, tittle-tattling, discontented person.

If this line ascends directly to the mount of Saturn, it denotes a good
position of Saturn in the geniture; but if crooked and passes towards
the Dragon line and the Liver line, it denotes a hard, covetous, and
laborious man.


                             THE VIA SOLIS.

This line being straight and uniformly composed and well coloured,
promises the favour of great men, and joyful honours; if dissected and
uneven, judge the contrary, with various impediments and envy.


                            THE VIA LACTEA.

This line being uniformly composed, proportionate and continued, denotes
fortunate journeys both by sea and land; also a good brain, the favour
of women (the mount of Venus being unafflicted), a composed and graceful
speech. If it be cut or distorted it argues infelicity and lies; but if
whole, ascending towards the little finger, it is a sign of great
happiness.


                          THE LINE OF SATURN.

This line being fully and wholly protracted to the middle finger is an
argument of profound meditations, and of fortunate events in counsels
and actions.

This line deficient is an evil sign portending many misfortunes, unless
other positions favour it. If bending backward, into the hollow of the
hand towards the mount of the Moon, after the form of a semicircle,
threatens imprisonment.

The line beginning from the line of Life and passing through the
Liver line, to the mount of Saturn—and if there it touch the
Saturnia—threatens imprisonment.


                     MORALITY. THE GIRDLE OF VENUS.

This line of itself, unless there be other testimony to counteract it,
is sufficient to indicate fulness of nature to appreciate the opposite
sex, while the want of it denotes (except in a measure given by the
fulness of the mount of Venus, etc.) coldness, unnaturalness for the
other sex, and usually a cold, insipid partner, a poor, neglectful
mother or father. But if this line have a sister line, that is, a small
line running parallel with the Girdle, it argues intemperance and lust
in both sexes and baseness in sexual matters—a filthy person. If this
line be divided or broken up by various lines it denotes losses and
infamy by reason of these lusts.


                THE LINE OF MARS. COURAGE AND FORTITUDE.

This line is sometimes called the sister line to the line of Life
because it is often found running parallel with that line and denotes
increased vital force—courage, because it strengthens the heart and thus
the energy. When clear and well-defined it presages a long and active
life, with little or no diseases. People with this line will suffer
largely from gout, rheumatism and apoplexy if they take stimulants of
any kind, inasmuch as the person will have sufficient energy of himself,
and all stimulation which will increase the vascular action will only
impede and retard the heart's action, like too much oil to a machine.
This line strengthens all things denoted by the line of Life, and if
clear and decidedly red it promises great success in war.


                     THE RULE TO TELL THE PLANETS.

When a figure similar to that used by astronomers in designating the
planets is found on the mount particularly set aside for that planet, as
on the mount of Jupiter there is the figure ♃, and on the mount of
Saturn there is the sign ♄, on Apollo the sign ☉, on the mount of
Mercury there is the sign ☿, and on the thick part of the thumb you find
a similar sign ♀, on the mount of the moon the sign ☽, on Mars' place
the figure ♂, and so on, then they are termed benevolent. How far,
however, this is relevant to the subject I do not state, but I should
rather advise the student to treat this with great care, although the
marks given underneath will be found of value when placed as indicated.

The planets are considered unfortunate when confused lines, broken
semicircle, gridiron marks, or signs contrary to the mounts indicated
above, as ♃ to mount of Jupiter, and so on, are found on the mounts or
places.

Venus (♀) is dignified when you find on her mount a clear star, or red
furrows running transversely parallel.

A jovial, merry nature is shown by fulness or elevation of the root of
the thumb, but luxurious, amorous, graceful, comely, concupiscent, very
honest, just and constant in friendship.

Description when strong and full: the body somewhat tall, skin clear,
eyes pleasant and sparkling, full of allurement and temptation. The hair
is brown, light, crisp and soft, sometimes slightly waving in front or
curling; a noble mind. The mind is ofttimes prone to boasting, and loves
the society of ladies; an admirer of music, painting and beauty.

Professions must be judged according to the strength or debility of the
mount; it produces musicians, merchants for fancy goods, teachers,
apothecaries, gardeners, etc.

The mount weak, not elevated or badly marked, causes men to be
inconstant, lascivious, vain. A cross near first joint of the thumb
signifies an adulterer, or has had or will have a mishap through
females.

The place of Venus, void of incisures, flat and smooth-looking, shows an
effeminate, rude and sorrowful person, or one foolishly and ridiculously
addicted to merriment and jesting.


                     THE PLANET MARS. COURAGE, WAR.

Mars is fortunate (1) when line of Life is strong, deep, red and
decently drawn; (2) when a cross or star is found on his place,
especially the palm of the hand.

Description when strong: denotes full courage, often bold, dauntless,
stout, warlike, contentious, firm of purpose, large and lusty appetite,
imperious.

Hair light brown or sandy, yellow, often red.

The eyes, blue or grey-green, which often grow red and terrible-looking
when angry.

Mars unfortunate: men, etc., are quarrelsome, violent, deceitful, angry
natures—produces thieves and murderers.

Profession according to strength: generals, surgeons, ironmasters or
workers and tradesmen of all kinds who work with metal, as ironmongers,
farriers, etc.

_Note._—Mars has signification of wives, husbands, sons and friends
(deceitful or otherwise).

Diseases: he produces fevers, blisters, sore eyes, skin diseases,
apoplexy, wounds, wicked thoughts.

With Jupiter he affects the gall, the reins, back and liver.

With Venus he affects the privy parts and sexual diseases.

If Mars be strong females have largely constructed bodies and love men
of rank; if Venus be strong men love women of rank; if weak they form
attachments for servants, coachmen and inferiors.

The sign ♄ placed in cavea of the hand threatens a fall from a precipice
or some high place; a fall is also indicated by the line of Saturn
stopping or breaking on the mount of Mars (hollow of hand).

Imprisonment: a crooked line ascending from mount of Mars to the mount
of Saturn.

Journeys and peregrinations denoted by a line running from plain of Mars
(hollow of hand) down to the Bracelet lines and ending immediately below
the mount of the Moon.


THE MOUNT OF JUPITER. HONOUR, FAME, RENOWN, ECCLESIASTICAL, STATE, LAW.

The planet is fortunate when (1) a star or double cross; (2) parallel
lines or (3) line clearly drawn from line of Life to his mount.

Description when fortunate: he signifies a noble, glorious, honest,
benevolent, affable, honourable, merry, renowned, neat, just and
equitable person; good-looking, formidable and happy, with beautiful
hazel or blue eyes.

Hair dark brown; grave gesture, modest, and faithful to their promises.

Professions, etc.: great dignitaries, churchmen, lawyers or counsellors,
statesmen or persons brought into contact with great men who are highly
esteemed and loved. They favour their wives, sons, and all good men.

Jupiter rules the liver, blood, ribs, lungs and gristles.

Jupiter unfortunate when half a gridiron on his mount. This shows losses
by powerful women. When generally unfortunate: when flat, flabby, with
no good marks on it, interlaced with a lot of little hair lines, etc.,
he causes persons to lose their estates and brings about great
calamities in money matters, although, if nothing else stops it, the
person will usually recover it after he becomes strong.

Diseases: when afflicted he causes troubles of the heart, cramps,
inflammation of the lungs, windy spasms.

Apoplexy indicated by a line transversely cutting his mount and
extending towards the mount of Saturn (middle finger), and forming there
a cleft or little lines.

Splendid honours and fame, riches, public rewards from princes and great
men, a cross, especially a clear and red star on the mount of Jupiter or
♃ marked thereon.


    THE MOUNT OF APOLLO. THE PLANET SUN. INGENUITY, PUBLIC HONOURS,
                            BRILLIANCY, ETC.

The Sun is fortunate—same as in last planet.

Description when fortunate: persons are faithful, ingenious, honoured,
high-minded, wise, humane, religious, just, moderate, aged, and do all
things wisely.

He gives a well-set body with yellow or sandy hair, and rules the heart
and eyes, the diaphragm (bowels) and nerves.

Description when unfortunate: the persons are proud and easily elated,
manifesting their access to dignity by unjust means, boasters and
immodest.

Diseases: he produces sore eyes and blindness, especially of right eye
in man and left in a woman, and trembling of the heart, syncope, etc.

Political honours: the Via Solis being uniform and of a clear good
colour; it also gives the favour and grace of princes.

Trouble and enmity from political and legal men when the Via Solis is
confused and afflicted.


                 THE MOON. TRAVELLING BY LAND AND SEA.

When fortunate: good and clear marks near this mount, stars, etc. These
persons are successful in journeys and messages and great prosperity in
foreign countries; to a female felicity and happiness in bearing
children.

Ominous signs placed here show death and affliction in childbirth.

Description: the persons will be famous, honest and honourable, with
well-set large bodies proportioned and pleasant. They travel by land and
sea, and causes them to desire to lie or walk by the side of
water—rivers and running waters.

When unfortunate principally known by pale and confused line on the
mount of the Moon.

The mount flat, soft and small, she causes persons to be inconstant in
life and actions.

Diseases: affects the brain, stomach and belly, and occasions paralysis,
epilepsy, cancer, spots on the body, gripings and severe colds.


THE PLANET SATURN. THE MOUNT OF SATURN. COUNSELS, MATHEMATICIANS, GRAVE
                       THINKERS, INVENTORS, ETC.

When fortunate: when the line of Saturn runs uniformly and clear to his
mount or ♄ marked thereon.

Saturn unfortunate when there are confused lines on his mount or
contrary or unfortunate signs thereon.

Saturn fortunate: men are silent, provident; good and profound, not
always rich, counsels, grave meditators, somewhat melancholy, and
generally have a foolish way of laughing and jesting.

Description: they generally have a slender body, and rather tall, pale
and feeble.

Hair brown or blackish colour, yet sometimes sandy. The eyes are sunken.

Trades, etc.: they are fortunate in agriculture, in minerals of all
kinds, as mines, etc. They are somewhat careless of their wives and less
addicted to sexual excesses, are more grasping and tenacious than is
just.

When Saturn is unfortunate he makes persons sorrowful, laborious,
sordid, humble, covetous, unfaithful, liars, unfortunate, malicious,
oppressed with continual griefs and calamities.

Diseases: he gives dangerous diseases, colds, coughs, melancholy,
hypochondriacal complaints, dropsy, gout, falling sickness, quartan and
hectic fevers.

Accidents: he produces falls from houses, imprisonment and danger of
drowning.

A deep line running from the space between the forefinger and middle
finger to the line of Fortune and cutting or interrupting it, signifies
a wound or disease in the lower part of the abdomen.


  THE PLANET MERCURY. THE MOUNT OF MERCURY. STUDY, RESEARCH, SCIENCES,
                             SPEAKING, ETC.

When this planet is fortunate, men are ingenious, studious, scientific
and searchers after secrets.

Professions, trades, etc., according to his dignity: he produces
orators, poets, eloquent speakers, persons ready to learn anything,
mathematicians, merchants, sometimes crafty, variable people.

When unfortunate he produces persons full of levity, liars, prattlers,
thieves, cheats, inconstant, faithless, traitors, etc.

Diseases: he produces madness, fury, acute fevers, etc.

Signs of deceit and danger to life: the mensa sharpened by the concourse
of the line of Fortune and the line of Life or the Liver line. The best
sign is the mensa diverging, open at both ends and forming the figure ≍.

Perfection of wit and science: a star placed (or other clearly-formed
flowers or flag) in the mensa especially under the mount of Mercury or
the Sun.


                      MENSA. THE PART OF FORTUNE.

When fortunate: liberal, magnanimous and long-lived people. The space
between the line of Fortune and the Liver line (called sometimes the
line of the Heart and the line of the Head), and forms a nice figure.

When unfortunate: small and narrow (by the approaching of these two
lines), it argues slender fortune, niggardliness and fearfulness.

Honours and dignities to follow by great and noble personages, when a
star or cross appears in this space, clear and well-formed, especially
under the mount of the Sun (see chapter on figures and flowers on hand).

The sign of ♃ here promises prominent ecclesiastical dignities.

Good fortune is denoted by the star or triple cross. Good and equal
lines in this space denote a good fortune; evil or unequal lines the
reverse.

The worst sign when no mensa is found, for it shows obscurity both of
life and fortune.

Misfortune and loss of honours when confused little lines appear here,
the good is diverted, and anxieties and troubles threaten, to honours
especially, if under the mount of the Sun.

Fortunate journeys: a cross or star on the outermost part of the mensa
on or near the mount of the Moon is a sure sign.


                        THE FINGERS. THE THUMB.

Riches and honours shown by overthwart lines clear and red underneath
the nail and joint of the thumb.

A violent death or danger through a married woman, etc.: a line passing
from the upper joint of the thumb to the line of Life.

A contentious nature: confused lines on the lower joint of the thumb;
one always brawling and scolding.

Death by hanging, etc.: a line surrounding the thumb at the middle
joint.

Riches and possessions—to be worked for: equal furrows under the lower
joint.

Idleness and lack of energy: if the first and second joints are void of
incisures.


                    THE FOREFINGER OR INDEX FINGER.

Inheritance: denoted by many overthwart lines in the top joint; these in
the second joint show envious and evil-disposed persons.

Issue, bad tongue: right lines running between the top and second joints
declare in a woman a numerous issue; in a man bitterness of tongue.

A jovial disposition: right lines in the joint near the mount of
Jupiter.

Unchaste and lascivious: in a female hand a star being placed in the
joint near the mount of Jupiter.


                           THE MIDDLE FINGER.

An unhappy, melancholy and depraved mind: denoted by small gridirons or
confused marks in the joints of this finger.

Success with metals: manifested by equal lines.

Drowning or violent death: this is denoted by a star in the joints of
this finger.

Folly and madness: a crossed line, extending from the root of this
finger upwards through the whole length of the finger.


                            THE RING FINGER.

Great and noble fame denoted by a line ascending unbroken from the mount
of the Sun through the joints of this finger to the end.

Honour and riches: this is shown by equal lines in the first joint (near
the mount).

Enmity of great men: denoted by overthwart lines here; it is made late
in life when these lines are intersected.


                           THE LITTLE FINGER.

The planet Mars has dominion over this finger. A strong and valorous
person when strong and well fed.

_Note._—From the joints of this finger as from the mount itself are
judgments passed concerning merchandise and favours.

Ingenuity and eloquence: a star in the first joint (near the mount of
Mercury) shows this; it is also shown by a right line extending from the
mount of Mercury to the end of finger, also a great speaker.

Foolishness, etc.: denoted by obtuse and confused marks placed here.

A thief and deceitful person: this is shown by confused and unfortunate
marks appearing in the first and second joints of this finger.

Perpetual inconstancy: this is shown by adverse lines in the last or top
joint of the finger.

_Note._—The number of wives and husbands are frequently indicated from
the small lines passing from the outermost part of the hand to the mount
of Mercury, but I consider the proper place is from the mount of Venus.

If the end of the little finger does not reach so far as to touch the
last joint of the ring finger, it signifies that the partner in marriage
will be imperious in all things.

The mounts marked with good figures and characters show good and happy
omens, being vitiated with confused or broken characters, etc., or
lines, they always denote the contrary, unless they are restrained by
other lines that be good.

Chiromancers generally teach that the first joints near the mount of the
finger indicate the early age, the second, the flourishing state of
manhood, and the last old age. But our opinion is that the planets shown
by the nativity of the persons do, in their proper order, manifest their
marks and characters whether for good or bad.

[Illustration:

  PLATE V.—ALLEGED MARKS ON THE FEET OF THE BENIGN BUDDHA.
]

_Note._—A knowledge of astrology will prove an acquisition to the study
of palmistry or any science.


              SIGNS ON THE HEAD. HOW TO READ THE FOREHEAD.

If a person has a broad forehead and takes the form of ⌒, a crescent, he
was born of poor parents but is sure to be rich.

If a prominent single vein or mark extends from the nose to the top of
the forehead the person is born to immense wealth.

If there are many similarly placed the person is very vicious.

If the forehead is depressed in the middle he is very jealous and a
lascivious or sinful man.

If the forehead is narrow he is a great miser.

If there be three furrows going across the head he is likely to live a
long life, especially if they go over the eyes.

If there be four such lines the person will be a commander or great
potentate and live a very long time.

Many indistinct lines on the forehead denote lewd persons.

If there be any marks in the middle of the forehead and they take the
form of a crescent ⌒, the person will be very prosperous and fortunate.


                           SIGNS ON THE FEET.

If a crescent or elongated horseshoe mark appear on sole of the foot and
the toes separated well from each other, the person will have a harsh
temper and remain poor.

If a female's toes are well set together and close, and has a wheel or
flower mark on either or both feet, she will become a lady of rank and
position.

If there be an ear-shaped figure on the foot and without hair, or a
little tuft, the person may expect to be successful in the world.


                               THE ARMS.

If her arms are very long she will be renowned and well-to-do.
Short-armed persons generally remain poor.


         Women's Printing Society, Ltd., 66, Whitcomb St., W.C.


                         NATURE'S FINER FORCES

                        and their Influence upon

                        HUMAN LIFE AND DESTINY.

                          BY RÂMA PRASÂD, M.A.

                         _Cloth, 8vo. 4/6 net._

"Of these excellent essays we cannot speak too highly; they will prove a
new revelation to our scientifically inclined readers and demonstrate
conclusively the impregnable basis of ancient Aryan Science, which did
not neglect the PSYCHIC and MENTAL DATA which the modern scientific
world MUST acknowledge ere long, and so enter upon an entire
'Reformation' of its methods and hypotheses. The whole science of the
Tatwas is founded on that which is termed 'Vibration' or 'Motion' and
opens up possibilities which readers of 'THE SECRET DOCTRINE' alone at
present can foresee."—_Lucifer._


                     The Dream of Ravan. A Mystery.

                         _Cloth, 8vo. 2/6 net._

"It is beyond question that the unknown writer of this work was both a
scholar and a mystic. That he had studied the _Râmâyana_ from the
original texts and was a master of Vedântic psychology is amply
manifested; that he was a mystic himself and spoke of things that were
realities to him and not mere empty speculations, is evident to every
earnest student of Indian theosophical literature. In no other western
publication have the three 'states' of man's consciousness been so
strikingly and so intelligibly set forth as by our author. In this work
the mystic and student of yoga will recognise many a home truth but
slightly veiled, and many an important secret wholly disclosed."


                           SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS

                       _Translated into English_

          WITH AN ESSAY "THE VISION OF SCIPIO" CONSIDERED AS A
                  FRAGMENT OF THE MYSTERIES. BY L. O.

              THE GOLDEN VERSES OF PYTHAGORAS. BY A. E. A.

                  THE SYMBOLS OF PYTHAGORAS. BY S. A.

                    _One vol., cloth, 8vo. 2/6 net._

"Not since 1804 has any English version of the two famous Pythagorean
treatises included in this volume appeared in book form. Of their
importance it is sufficient to state that they have been justly held in
the highest esteem by Mystics from an early period to the present time.
This has also been the case with the _Somnium Scipionis_ or Vision of
Scipio, Cicero's famous essay. L. O.'s able essay will be found most
valuable to students."


                      The Building of the Cosmos.

                            BY ANNIE BESANT.

                      _Cloth, 8vo. Price 2/- net._

"Sound; Fire; Yoga; and Symbolism are the subjects treated of in this
most excellent book. The essay upon Yoga, the Kingly Science of the Soul
whereby a man may attain to that Divine Wisdom which is his birthright,
deserves to be read of all men. To lovers of the Scriptures of the World
the essay on 'Symbolism' will appeal strongly and will be found most
helpful, for in those Ancient Writings the most important truths are
frequently veiled from the superficial reader by an allegory or a
symbol, and in this essay the reader will find a clue to the method by
which the study of symbols may be approached with beneficial results.
Considerable light is thrown upon some of the very complex symbols
pertaining to Indian Philosophies."


            THE YOGA OF CHRIST: or the Science of the Soul.

                        WRITTEN DOWN BY A. K. G.

                  EDITED BY F. HENRIETTA MÜLLER, B.A.

               _Cloth, 8vo, 2/- net. Wrappers, 1/- net._

"This book appeals especially to that large class of devout souls who
find neither satisfying Truth nor edifying practice in Modern
Christianity; who believe, nevertheless, that Christ had a message for
them, and that somewhere hidden beneath the noise of words, and the
misinterpretations of sectarians, a Truth, divine and living, may be
found: to them the following pages will bring, if not the full radiance
of Christ's illuminating Love, at least many valuable suggestions for
thought, and aids in the solution of difficult problems. That
Christianity, the religion which the West has made peculiarly its own,
should be reverentially taught by 'an Indian' from an Indian point of
view, is in itself unusual, may be regarded as a happy omen of the
ultimate breaking down of those barriers of Sectarianism which have
hitherto been potent in dividing the English people from sympathetic
communion with the natives of India."


                  THE THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY,
                 7, DUKE STREET, ADELPHI, LONDON, W.C.




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 2. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INDIAN PALMISTRY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


