The Project Gutenberg eBook of Types of News Writing
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Types of News Writing

Author: Willard Grosvenor Bleyer

Release date: May 25, 2019 [eBook #59606]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
        generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
        Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TYPES OF NEWS WRITING ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









TYPES OF NEWS WRITING

  BY
  WILLARD GROSVENOR BLEYER, PH.D.

  _Author of “Newspaper Writing and Editing” and Professor of
  Journalism in the University of Wisconsin_

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO
  HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

  The Riverside Press Cambridge




COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY WILLARD GROSVENOR BLEYER

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

  The Riverside Press
  CAMBRIDGE · MASSACHUSETTS
  U . S . A




PREFACE


This book has been prepared with the purpose of furnishing students
of journalism and young reporters with a large collection of typical
news stories. For college classes it may be used as a textbook. For
newspaper workers it is offered as a handbook to which they may turn,
in a particular case, to find out what news to get, where to get it,
and how to present it effectively. Every young writer on a newspaper
is called upon to do kinds of reporting in which he lacks experience.
If, with the aid of an index, he can turn readily to several instances
where more experienced writers have solved problems like his own, he
will undertake his new task with a clearer idea of what to do and how
to do it.

For systematic instruction in news writing it is desirable that
students have in convenient form representative stories for study and
analysis. Newspapers, it might be thought, would furnish this material,
but experience has shown that it is often difficult to find, in current
issues of newspapers, examples of the particular kind of story under
consideration, and it is likewise difficult to supply every student
in a large class with a copy of the issue that happens to contain the
desired example.

The selection of specimens for this book has been determined largely
by two considerations: first, that the news which the story contains
should be typical, rather than extraordinary or “freakish”; and second,
that the story should present the news effectively. It has been assumed
that the student must first learn to handle average news well in order
to grapple successfully with extraordinary happenings. A considerable
part of the book deals with more or less routine news, because it is
with this type that a large portion of the reporter’s work is concerned.

Since newspapers are read rapidly, it has been taken for granted that a
story is most effective when its structure and style enable the reader
to get the news with the least effort and the greatest interest. Many
pieces of news can best be treated in a simple, concise style, with the
essential facts well massed in a summary lead. Such straightforward
presentation does not mean that the style must be bald and unoriginal.
The examples illustrative of this purely informative type of news story
are generally marked by a simplicity and directness of expression that
are characteristic of good journalistic style.

Informative news stories in which the so-called “human interest”
element has been developed have also been included in considerable
number, not only because they are perennially popular, but because
some news may be presented very effectively by bringing out its human
interest phases. As a type distinct from these stories with news of
some value are those entertaining and appealing stories, containing
little or no real news, that are generally known as “feature” or “human
interest” stories. Both of these types illustrate the application to
news writing of recognized methods of fiction. The use of these methods
is entirely commendable. The danger for the reporter lies in failure
to discriminate between fiction and its methods. To use the devices
of fiction in order to portray faithfully actual events is one thing;
to substitute fictitious details in order to heighten the effect is
quite another. No stories have been included in this book that are
unquestionably fictitious. Some that may have imaginary details have
been given to furnish material for discussion.

The examples presented here are not put forward as models for the
student to imitate in every respect. Few news stories are perfect
in structure and style. The conditions under which they are written
and edited make careful revision almost impossible. For the purpose
of analysis, work that is not so well done as it might have been is
valuable as showing the student what to avoid in his own writing.

The stories have been grouped in chapters partly on the basis of
subject matter and partly on that of the methods used. This arrangement
has been adopted not as a complete classification of news, but rather
as a convenient grouping for purposes of study. In each chapter has
been included a brief discussion of the chief points to be considered
in analyzing and in writing the type of story in that division. None of
the points has been treated at length owing to lack of space and to the
fact that most of them have been taken up in detail by the author in
another textbook, “Newspaper Writing and Editing.”

Attention has been called in each chapter to the underlying purpose
that should determine the selection and the presentation of the kind of
news included in that group. This has been done in the belief that the
reporter should consider carefully the probable effect on the reader of
every story that he writes. Since “the food of opinion is the news of
the day,” the kind of food that he serves and the manner in which he
serves it is a matter of consequence, not only to him and his newspaper
but to society as a whole. Not until a reporter realizes the influence
that his news stories may have on the ideas and ideals of thousands of
readers, does he appreciate fully the significance of his work. The
possibilities of what has been termed “constructive journalism” have
been dwelt upon at some length because it is evident that well-edited
papers are undertaking more and more to present the news so that it
will have a wholesome effect on their readers.

The selections in this book have been taken from daily newspapers
in all parts of the country and may be said to illustrate current
practice. The name of the paper has been attached to each example, not
only in acknowledgment of the credit due, but in an effort to lead the
student to consider the story from the point of view of the policy of
the paper and of the character of the readers to whom it appeals. The
student should compare all of the stories taken from each paper and
should, if possible, examine the current issues.

Although it has not seemed desirable to print the examples in so small
type as that commonly used in newspapers, the column width has been
retained in order to reproduce, as far as possible, the effect of the
original form. Headlines have not been given because they are not
an integral part of the story. In a few instances stories have been
condensed when it was possible to do so without destroying the effect.
For obvious reasons names and addresses have frequently been changed,
and errors that escaped notice have been corrected in a number of the
stories.

The author is deeply indebted to Alice Haskell Bleyer for invaluable
suggestions and criticism in connection with every detail of this book.

  UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN, MADISON,
         _January_ 20, 1916.




CONTENTS


     I. NEWS WRITING                                             1

    II. THE STUDY OF NEWS STORIES                                6

        AN OUTLINE FOR THE ANALYSIS OF NEWS STORIES             12

   III. FIRES AND ACCIDENTS                                     15

    IV. POLICE NEWS AND CRIME                                   46

     V. CRIMINAL AND CIVIL COURTS                               76

    VI. INVESTIGATIONS, LEGISLATION, AND MEETINGS              107

   VII. SPEECHES, INTERVIEWS, AND REPORTS                      126

  VIII. EXHIBITIONS, ENTERTAINMENTS, AND SPECIAL OCCASIONS     141

    IX. ILLNESS AND DEATH                                      168

     X. POLITICS AND ELECTIONS                                 179

    XI. LABOR TROUBLES AND STRIKES                             186

   XII. WEATHER                                                192

  XIII. SPORTS                                                 200

   XIV. SOCIETY                                                221

    XV. MISCELLANEOUS LOCAL NEWS                               232

        INDEX                                                  261




TYPES OF NEWS WRITING

CHAPTER I

NEWS WRITING


=Contents of newspapers.= The average daily newspaper includes a
larger amount and variety of reading matter than most readers realize.
In one issue of a large daily paper, which contains from 60,000 to
80,000 words exclusive of advertising, are usually to be found examples
of practically every type of literary composition. The contents range
from news of accidents and crime to humorous and serious verse, from
market reports to a short story or a chapter of a novel, from dramatic
and musical criticism to cooking recipes and cosmetic formulas, from
argumentative editorials to reports of boxing matches and baseball
games. Vivid description, spirited narrative, critical appreciation,
logical argument, lucid explanation, moving pathos, vigorous appeals,
wit and humor--all are often exemplified in a single issue of a
well-edited newspaper. Scarcely any other form of publication has
regularly so great a variety of writing as the daily newspaper. Thus,
although a newspaper is ordinarily thought of solely as a medium for
the publication of current news and editorials, the average daily paper
supplies its readers with much entertaining reading matter as well as
considerable advice and useful information.

=Classification of contents.= Diversified as are the contents of
a typical daily paper, they may be grouped in seven classes: (1) news
stories; (2) special feature articles; (3) editorials; (4) dramatic,
musical, and literary criticism; (5) practical advice and useful
information; (6) humorous matter; (7) fiction. Of these seven classes,
the first four--news stories, special feature articles, editorials, and
dramatic, musical, and literary criticism--are generally considered to
be the distinctly journalistic types of writing.

News stories present (1) timely events of interest and significance to
readers, and (2) timely incidents of little or no news value that are
made entertaining by the manner in which they are presented. The first
is the common type of news story; the second is usually called the
“human interest” or “feature” story. Although it is sometimes said that
anything that has ever happened is news if it has not been generally
known, it is evident that events that have occurred in the past are
not worth publishing as news unless they have a timely interest and
significance. A distinction is generally made between “spot news,”
which is news of events when they occur, and “detail” or “situation”
material that is presented some time later in the form of special
correspondence or of special feature articles.

Special feature articles are detailed presentations of (1) matters of
recent news that are of sufficient interest to warrant elaboration,
(2) timely topics not directly connected with the news of the day, (3)
subjects of interest that are neither timely nor connected with current
events. They are informative in character and are generally of some
length. They are usually published in magazine sections of Saturday or
Sunday editions, but in some papers they appear daily.

Editorials have as their purpose the interpretation of news and of
current issues and the discussion of matters of general interest,
particularly with a view to convincing readers of the truth or the
falsity of some proposition and of persuading them to act in accordance
with the convictions thus created. In this way they differ from both
news stories and special feature articles.

Dramatic, musical, and literary criticism consists of reviewing and
passing judgment on current dramatic performances, concerts, and books.
To the extent that some reviews of plays and concerts merely give
informative news concerning the event, they are like news stories, but
in so far as they are critical, they are more like editorials. Book
reviews, likewise, may simply give information regarding the contents
of a book, or they may undertake to evaluate it by pointing out its
merits and defects.

Practical advice and useful information in special fields, humorous
matter, and fiction, as given in the daily newspaper, do not differ
materially from similar matter published in other forms and cannot be
considered distinctly journalistic types of writing.

=How news is gathered.= Since the day’s news is the essential part
of the daily newspaper, the gathering, writing, and editing of news
is naturally the chief concern of journalism. From the point of view
of newspaper organization for handling news, it is divided into two
general classes: (1) local news, and (2) telegraph news. Local news,
which is that of the city where the paper is published as well as of
its immediate vicinity, is gathered (1) by reporters working under
the direction of the city editor of the paper, and (2) by reporters
working under the direction of the head of a local news association
or bureau, the news service of which the paper uses to supplement its
own news gathering. Telegraph news includes all news not local, which
comes to the paper by telegraph, long-distance telephone, cable, or
mail, whether sent by its own correspondents or by a news association
such as the Associated Press or the United Press. The reporters and
correspondents of the press associations work under practically the
same conditions as the newspaper’s own correspondents, but they are
responsible to the division head of the press association, whereas the
newspaper’s correspondents are under the direction of the telegraph
editor or of the state editor of the paper. The work of news gathering
is not essentially different, whether done by a reporter or by a
correspondent in the employ of a newspaper or of a news-gathering
association.

=How news is written.= After the reporter has obtained the news,
he returns to the office and writes his story as rapidly as possible,
in accordance with any instructions that the city editor may give
him. If it is inexpedient for him to return to the office, he writes
his story quickly at some convenient place and sends it to the office
by messenger or by telephone. Under some circumstances, particularly
when lack of time prevents his writing the story and sending it in,
he telephones the facts to a rewrite man in the office, who writes
the story from the data thus secured. The reporter for a local news
association prepares his stories, as directed by the news editor of the
association, under practically the same conditions as the newspaper
reporter.

The correspondent, after writing his story, mails it, files it at the
telegraph office, or telephones it to the newspaper office. He, too,
may telephone the bare facts to have them written in news-story form by
a rewrite man in the newspaper office. The correspondent of a general
news-gathering agency handles his news in the same way except that he
sends it by mail, telegraph, or telephone to the district office of the
association or agency that he represents. At this district office it
is edited and sent out to those papers in various parts of the country
that use the association’s service.

As news stories, whether local or telegraph, are edited before they are
printed, practically all stories as they appear in the newspaper are
the work not only of the reporter or correspondent who gathered the
news, but of one or more editors and copy-readers. Well-written stories
of reporters and correspondents usually undergo little change when
edited. A poorly written story, on the other hand, may be made over
into a very effective one by a rewrite man, an editor, or a copy-reader.

=Conditions affecting news writing.= The structure and the style
of news stories are determined (1) by the conditions under which they
are written, (2) by the character of the readers, (3) by the conditions
under which newspapers are read, (4) by the typographical form of
newspapers, and (5) by the popular taste.

Newspaper writing must be done rapidly under considerable pressure
and generally without opportunity for careful revision. Although this
haste does not excuse incorrect and slovenly English, it does result
in looser, less finished writing than might be produced under more
favorable circumstances. In rapid writing, and particularly in handling
similar material from day to day, the writer, unless he is on his
guard, is likely to fall into the habit of using stock phrases, trite
and colorless.

The large amount of available news that must be crowded daily into
limited space makes it essential to present the news in compact form
and concise style. “Boil it down” and “Cut it to the bone” are constant
admonitions in every newspaper office. Conciseness is a necessary
quality of newspaper style.

The average newspaper, in order to succeed, must appeal to all classes
of readers in the community. It must present its contents in a way that
will attract and interest the so-called masses as well as the business
and the professional classes. The style of writing is generally adapted
to readers of limited education no less than to the well educated.
Comparative simplicity of expression, accordingly, is the rule in
newspaper writing.

Newspapers are read rapidly by practically all classes of readers.
They must, therefore, be written in a style that makes rapid reading
easy. Important details are placed at the beginning of paragraphs and
sentences, where they will catch the eye at once. The emphasis thus
given by the initial position is one of the distinctive characteristics
of newspaper writing. To the most important details made prominent in
this way are added the less significant but necessary particulars, one
by one, in natural order. This arrangement results in a loose rather
than a periodic sentence structure and eliminates the possibility of a
climactic effect in the paragraphs or in the whole story.

The shortness of the line in the narrow column affects newspaper style
because it necessitates a proportionate shortening of the paragraph.
Paragraphs that appear long seem heavy and uninviting, especially to
the rapid reader. Since but six words on an average can be crowded
into a line in newspapers, as compared to ten or twelve in a line in
most books, newspaper paragraphs can be only half as long as those in
ordinary prose without loss of effectiveness.

The popular demand for novelty and variety prevents any form of
newspaper writing from becoming fixed, and results from time to time in
the development of new forms and new styles of news writing. To make
some news stories entertaining rather than purely informative, a number
of newspapers abandon the conventional summary beginning, or lead,
and use unconventional ones like the beginnings of short stories. They
likewise give prominence to trivial happenings worked up into so-called
“human interest” or “feature” stories, because in that form they make
entertaining reading.

=Characteristics of news writing.= As a result of these various
conditions and influences news writing has come to have certain
well marked characteristics. It must be (1) concise, (2) clear, (3)
comparatively simple, (4) easily read, and (5) attractive to all
classes.

Conciseness requires that needless words be omitted, that only such
details be given as are necessary for effective presentation of the
subject, and that the length of the story be proportionate to the
importance of the material. In order to be concise, however, news
writing does not have to be bald and unattractive.

Clearness is secured in journalistic style by comparative simplicity of
diction, of sentence construction, and of paragraph structure. Learned
diction, elaborate figures of speech, and involved sentences have no
place in news writing intended to appeal to all classes of readers.

To be attractive to the average rapid reader newspaper style must be
easy to read. It is made easy, as has been pointed out, by placing
the important points in conspicuous positions at the beginnings of
sentences and paragraphs. To satisfy the popular taste newspaper
writing must also be interesting in form and in style. It sometimes
adopts the more or less striking devices of fiction in order to add
to its effectiveness. Furthermore, attractiveness is secured by such
typographical means as the use of a frame, or “box,” and bold-face
type, for facts of especial importance.




CHAPTER II

THE STUDY OF NEWS STORIES


=Value of study.= Every good news story may be regarded as a
solution of a difficult problem in gathering, selecting, and weaving
together a number of details. The steps in the solution may be as
carefully followed as the steps in solving a problem in algebra or
in performing an experiment in physics. As in the analysis of such
problems and experiments, so in the analysis of news stories, the
ultimate purpose is to find out how to solve similar problems as they
arise in actual experience. However interesting the theories and
principles of the art of news writing may be for themselves, it is the
practical application of them in the writer’s own work that gives them
their value for the student of journalism.

=Aims in studying news stories.= The purpose in analyzing typical
examples of news writing should be to discover in detail (1) how to
obtain news, (2) how to determine its value, and (3) how to present
it most effectively. Most stories reveal the means by which their
contents were obtained and the importance which the writer or editor
attached to each of the details. Sources of information and standards
for evaluating material are thus shown by a careful examination
of examples. A study of well-written news stories makes clear the
application of the principles of prose composition to the writing of
news. A comparison of several news stories of the same type brings
out the variety of ways in which similar material may be handled.
The writer must know the varied possibilities of treating material,
because, in working on similar matter from day to day, he is in great
danger of dropping into conventional forms and stereotyped expressions.

=Methods of analysis.= In the study of a news story the following
points should be considered: (1) the value of the news; (2) the sources
of the news; (3) the methods by which it was obtained; (4) the purpose
of the story; (5) the type of the story; (6) the structure; (7) the
literary style; and (8) the typographical style.

=News and news values.= News, as commonly defined, is anything
timely that interests a number of readers, and the best news is that
which has the greatest interest for the greatest number. Constructive
journalism is not satisfied to present merely what readers are
naturally interested in; it aims to give news that is significant
to them from the point of view of their personal affairs as well
as from that of the welfare of society. It likewise undertakes to
create interest in significant news that of itself may not interest
a considerable number of readers. Each story, therefore, should be
examined in order to determine why the news in it was considered of
interest and significance to the readers of the paper in which it was
published, as well as how great the interest and the significance were
believed to be as indicated by the space given to the story.

News values are based largely on the reader’s interest in (1) timely
matters, (2) extraordinary events and circumstances, (3) struggles for
supremacy in politics, business, sports, etc., (4) matters involving
the property, life, and welfare of fellow men, (5) children, (6)
animals, (7) hobbies and amusements.

The degree of the reader’s interest in these matters of news is
proportionate to (1) his familiarity with the persons, the places, and
the things involved, (2) the importance and the prominence of these
persons, places, and things, (3) the closeness of their relation to the
reader’s personal affairs.

The distinction between local news and general news grows out of the
greater degree of interest on the part of the reader in persons and
places that he knows and in matters that are closely related to his
business and his home. News of significance concerning the community in
which he lives is of prime importance to every reader. Interest in news
may generally be said to vary inversely in proportion to the distance
between the place where the news originates and the place where the
paper is published. Local interest is given to general news by bringing
out those phases, or “local ends,” of telegraph news that are of
significance in the community in which the paper circulates.

Every story indicates the evaluation of the news that it presents
as made by the reporter or correspondent, and by the editor or the
copy-reader. By determining the basis of this evaluation, the student
acquires a criterion by which to judge the news value of whatever he is
called upon to report.

=Sources of news.= From the details of a news story it is almost
always possible to infer the sources from which the news was obtained.
Public and private records, reports, officials, eye-witnesses, for
example, are often cited as authorities for the facts in the story.
These sources should be noted carefully, so that they may be drawn
upon by the student in his own reporting. In fact, a list of sources
compiled from news stories of various kinds, such as those of crime,
accidents, fires, etc., will be found helpful to the beginner.

=Methods of news gathering.= How the details of the news were
obtained may also be ascertained from an examination of the story. In
the report of an interview, for example, the reporter’s questions may
be inferred from the person’s replies. Not infrequently the story
shows indirectly the circumstances under which the reporter secured
the material. The student will do well to note every such hint and
suggestion.

=Purpose.= Every news story should present the details of the news
as accurately as possible and as completely as the significance of
the news warrants. The embellishment of news stories with fictitious
details to make them more interesting or more entertaining, as well
as the distortion and suppression of significant facts of the news in
order to accomplish some end, are alike opposed to the fundamental
purpose of the newspaper. Besides reporting the news with fairness
and accuracy, however, the writer, consciously or unconsciously, may
accomplish other ends by the manner in which he presents his material.
By giving prominence to certain details and aspects of a piece of
news, he may produce one effect upon the reader’s mind; by emphasizing
others in the same piece of news, he may produce an entirely different
impression. Thus news of accidents, crime, courts, and similar matters
can be presented so as to exert either a wholesome or an unwholesome
influence on readers; that is, it may be constructive or destructive in
its effect. Stories of crime, for example, may be written in a manner
that tends to make the wrongdoer more or less of a hero, and hence may
encourage others to imitate his career; or they may be written in a way
that tends to deter readers from committing similar crimes. Whether
wrongdoing is made attractive or unattractive in news stories depends
not so much upon giving the facts fully and accurately as upon the
reporter’s attitude toward his material.

Some newspapers simply record the news without emphasizing either its
constructive or its destructive phases. Newspapers of this type have
been likened to mirrors that reflect impartially whatever comes within
their range. This policy is expressed in the dictum of a well-known
editor when he declared, “Whatever the Divine Providence permitted to
occur, I was not too proud to report.” Purely informative news stories
and entertaining feature stories in these papers are written without
particular regard for their influence on readers.

Other newspapers, not satisfied with reporting the day’s events in an
accurate but colorless manner, without any particular consideration
for its effect upon their readers, deliberately undertake to give news
in such a way that it tends to be helpful and constructive in its
influence. They publish not merely the usual details regarding fires
and accidents; they emphasize the causes, the responsibility, and the
frequency of such occurrences, in order to impress upon readers the
importance of taking preventive measures against the recurrence of
such disasters. They also recognize the fact that some legitimate news,
even when given in what is ordinarily considered an unobjectionable
manner, tends to have a bad effect on readers in that it suggests
to them ideas and ideals inimical to the best interests of society
as a whole. So-called “waves” of crime and suicide they realize are
often the result of suggestions given to morally unstable readers by
newspaper stories of crimes and suicides. By constructive treatment
of such news, they attempt to reduce to a minimum these undesirable
suggestions and to substitute for them suggestions that tend to prevent
similar criminal and anti-social acts.

Another class of newspapers, apparently disregarding the unwholesome
effect upon their readers, give prominence to sensational, ghastly,
and scandalous phases of the news because they know that such details
appeal to the morbid interest of many readers. The not uncommon
explanation made by these newspapers for such treatment of news is that
they are giving the public what it wants. Critics of these papers deny
the validity of this excuse and point out that it would apply equally
to the selling of habit-forming drugs and adulterated food, acts now
forbidden by law.

Since the underlying purpose of the writer plays an important part in
the selection and the arrangement of material for news stories, as well
as in the effect that stories produce upon readers, it deserves careful
consideration in the analysis of news stories.

=Type of story.= There are two general types of news stories: (1)
the informative news story, the chief aim of which is to give the facts
of the news; and (2) the feature or human interest story, the chief
aim of which is to take material of little or no news value and make
it interesting. The fundamental difference between these two kinds of
stories is the news value of the contents. The presence or absence of
so-called “human interest” is not the basis of this classification, for
informative news stories may be developed by bringing out the human
interest element in the news.

The informative news story may be one of two kinds: (1) the story the
chief purpose of which is to record the facts of the news without
particular regard to its effect upon the readers; and (2) the story
that presents the facts of the news in such a way as to produce a
wholesome effect.

The purely informative news story usually presents the facts of the
news so that they can be grasped readily in rapid reading. Its length
is determined by the value of its news as measured by the ordinary
standards of news values. It may be made interesting by bringing out
the human interest element and by any literary device that is adapted
to the subject. Usually it has a summary lead.

The informative story of the constructive type aims to interest the
reader in the significance of the facts of the news, and the length of
the story, accordingly, is determined by the importance of the news
from this point of view. By bringing out the human interest element
in the constructive type of story, the writer is able to make the
emotional appeal to the readers that is particularly effective in
accomplishing the purposes of this kind of story. Stories of this type
may or may not have a summary lead.

In the entertaining feature story that contains little or no news, the
interest lies entirely in the manner in which the facts are told. The
literary ability of the writer is here tested to the utmost, for a
story is read only so far as it interests. The length of these stories,
therefore, is determined by the writer’s success in sustaining the
reader’s interest.

News stories in method are (1) narrative, (2) descriptive, (3)
expository, or (4) any combination of these three forms of discourse.
These forms are often to be found combined in a single story. The
reporter, for example, may in one story narrate a series of incidents,
describe the persons and places involved, and explain causes, motives,
and results.

In the purely informative news story that is narrative in form there is
little suspense, because the essential facts are usually summarized in
the beginning, or lead. In the narrative feature story, however, the
interest is frequently sustained by the same devices that are used in
fiction.

Description in news stories may be either suggestive or detailed. In
most stories lack of space makes it impossible to do more than sketch
briefly the appearance of persons and objects by suggestive touches.
In long stories, however, when circumstances warrant it, descriptions
may be given in considerable detail. The purpose in both kinds of
description should be to convey to the reader impressions of sights,
sounds, etc., as vivid as those the reporter himself experienced.

News stories are expository, as a whole or in part, whenever situations
must be made clear by explaining motives, causes, results, and other
phases of the news, or by summarizing the whole or a part of speeches,
reports, etc. Such exposition should always be as simple and lucid as
possible.

=Structure of the story.= The structure of the news story is
concerned with (1) the beginning, or lead, and (2) the body of the
story. The informative story usually begins with a summary lead that
answers the reader’s questions Who? What? Where? When? Why? How? Thus
the summary lead includes the following details: (1) the persons,
(2) the event, (3) the place, (4) the time, (5) the cause, (6) the
significant circumstances. Any one of these elements of the news may be
“featured” in the place of prominence at the beginning of the story,
although the time and the place are seldom played up in this way. The
story of entertainment or appeal, on the other hand, usually avoids
the summary lead by beginning in one of the ways common to fictitious
narratives. In its beginning, its effort to sustain suspense, and its
semblance of plot the human interest or feature story closely resembles
the short story.

In the body of the story the details follow a logical order. The
arrangement in narrative stories is usually chronological. Only such
of the details summarized in the lead are repeated in the body of the
story as are needed for clearness. Although it is well to round out
stories in the last paragraph, the ending does not receive so much
attention as in other prose, because the exigencies of “make-up” often
necessitate the cutting off of the last paragraph or two.

=Literary style.= The style of a news story is concerned with such
elements as (1) paragraphs, (2) sentences, (3) words; and with such
qualities as (1) clearness, (2) force, (3) animation, (4) humor, (5)
pathos, (6) taste.

Analysis of paragraphs and sentences should include: (1) the length
of the paragraph and of the sentence; (2) the unity of thought in the
sentence, and the unity of topic in the paragraph; (3) the coherence,
or connection between the parts; and (4) the emphasis given to the
important ideas by their position in sentence and paragraph.

Because of the narrowness of the columns the newspaper paragraph must
be comparatively short to avoid appearing heavy and uninviting. The
typical newspaper paragraph contains from 35 to 75 words, whereas the
average paragraph in ordinary prose is from 150 to 250 words in length.

In sentence length, and in paragraph and sentence unity and coherence,
the style of the news story does not differ from that of other prose.
Involved constructions, long periodic sentences, and similar rhetorical
devices, however, have no place in journalistic writing, because they
tend to prevent rapid reading.

The emphasis given to an important point by placing it at the beginning
of a sentence or a paragraph, is a distinctive characteristic of
newspaper style, growing out of the fact that in rapid reading the eye
catches important points quickly if they occupy these initial positions.

Specific words in original combinations are always preferable to
colorless, general terms and trite phrases. Technical, scientific,
and learned words should be avoided unless fully explained. Slang and
colloquial expressions may be used when the tone of the story justifies
them.

Clearness, which is essential to rapid reading, depends upon the
arrangement, the connection, and the expression of ideas, and the
student will do well to analyze these essential factors in well-written
stories. How brisk movement and steady progress can be secured is also
worthy of notice. Humor and pathos are not infrequent in news stories,
particularly in those of the feature and human interest type. The
student should observe how humor may be effective without ridicule,
buffoonery, or vulgarity, and how offensive facts may be presented in
news stories without violating the canons of good taste.

=Typographical style.= Peculiarities in such details of
typographical style as abbreviation, capitalization, hyphenation,
and the use of numerical figures should be noted in each story and
associated with the newspaper from which the story was taken, for each
paper has a typographical style of its own. One style is as good as
another, but it is essential that consistency be maintained.

The printing of significant facts in a box at the beginning or in the
body of a story, often in bold-face type, the method of arranging lists
of dead and injured, the forms for market reports, scores in sports,
and similar details should be carefully noted.


AN OUTLINE FOR THE ANALYSIS OF NEWS STORIES

NEWS VALUES

    1. In what paper was the story published?

    2. What are the policy and the character of the paper?

    3. How widely does the paper circulate outside of the place in
       which it is published?

    4. Does the paper appeal to a particular class of readers?

    5. Is the piece of news presented from the point of view of
       this class?

    6. What, for the average reader, is the source of interest in
       the news contained in the story?

    7. How much would the news interest the average reader? Why?

    8. Do you think that the news was worth more or less space than
       was given to it? Why?

    9. What more significant phases might have been played up or
       developed?

SOURCES OF NEWS

    1. How did the news originate?

    2. Where was the first record of it probably made? By whom?

    3. What records and what persons may have been consulted in
       securing the news?

    4. What reference books or material may have been used in
       getting or in verifying the details of the story?

    5. What other possible sources might have been consulted?

METHODS OF NEWS GATHERING

    1. What evidence does the story give of the methods by which
       the news was obtained?

    2. Is there any evidence that the reporter or correspondent
       failed to get any of the important details of the piece of
       news?

PURPOSE

    1. Does the story seem to be fair and unbiased?

    2. Is there evidence that any important facts were suppressed or
       that the story was colored to conform to the policy of the
       paper?

    3. Is the handling of the news constructive or destructive in
       its effect?

    4. What, if any, is the constructive purpose of the writer?

    5. Is the story so treated as to tempt the reader to imitate
       anti-social acts?

TYPE OF STORY

    1. Is the primary purpose of the story to inform or to entertain?

    2. Is the story largely narrative and descriptive? Is it largely
       explanatory? Is it largely direct or indirect quotation?

    3. If the story is narrative in form, is the order chronological?

    4. Is the narrative clear or confused?

    5. Does the narrative move slowly or briskly? Why?

    6. Are accounts of the event by participants or eye-witnesses
       used? If so, are these accounts in direct or indirect
       quotation form?

    7. Are remarks and conversation of participants and
       eye-witnesses given?

    8. Is the description detailed or suggestive? Is it effective?
       Why?

    9. Is there a striving for effect in the description?

   10. If the story is that of a speech, report, etc., is the
       material arranged in logical order?

   11. Is much or little made of the personal, or human interest,
       element in the story of the speech or the interview?

STRUCTURE OF THE STORY

    1. Has the story a summary lead or an unconventional beginning?

    2. Does the lead contain the essential facts concisely
       presented?

    3. Is the most striking detail played up as the feature in the
       first group of words of the opening sentence of the lead?

    4. What other element in the news might have been featured in
       the lead?

    5. Is the lead proportionate in length to the whole story?

    6. How are the details arranged in the body of the story?

    7. Is there any evidence that the story was cut down in making
       up the paper?

    8. Are the paragraphs closely connected?

    9. Is there unnecessary repetition in the story?

   10. Could the arrangement of the details be improved? How?

LITERARY STYLE OF THE STORY

PARAGRAPHS

    1. What is the average length of the paragraphs?

    2. Are any of the paragraphs too long or too short?

    3. Is each paragraph a unit?

    4. Are the details well arranged and closely connected in the
       paragraphs?

    5. Does the first group of words at the beginning of each
       paragraph attract the reader as his eye glances down the
       story?

    6. Could any of the paragraph beginnings be made more
       effective? How?

SENTENCES

    1. What is the average length of the sentences?

    2. Are any of the sentences too long or too short?

    3. Is the construction of each sentence evident in rapid
       reading?

    4. Is each sentence a unified expression of a closely related
       group of ideas?

    5. Are the parts of the sentences combined in firm, closely
       knit construction?

    6. Do the sentence beginnings attract the reader by the
       importance and the interest of the ideas expressed in the
       first group of words?

    7. Do any of the sentences trail off loosely into a succession
       of phrases and clauses?

    8. Is there variety in sentence length and sentence
       construction?

WORDS

    1. Is the style concise or wordy?

    2. Is the diction original or hackneyed?

    3. Is the style marked by many adjectives or by superlatives?

    4. Are the verbs specific and forcible?

    5. Is the diction too learned for the comprehension of the
       average rapid reader?

    6. Are words used idiomatically and accurately?

    7. Are slang and colloquial expressions found in the story?
       What is the effect of them?

    8. Is the diction is keeping with the tone of the story?

QUALITIES OF STYLE

    1. Can the details of the story be easily comprehended in rapid
       reading; that is, is the style comparatively simple?

    2. Upon what does the general clearness of the story depend?

    3. Is the movement slow or rapid? Why?

    4. Is there any humor or pathos in the story? How is the
       humorous or the pathetic effect secured?

    5. Has the news possibilities for humorous or pathetic
       treatment that are not developed?

    6. Is the story in good taste?

TYPOGRAPHICAL STYLE

    1. What are the peculiarities of abbreviation, capitalization,
       hyphenation, and use of numerical figures?

    2. Is the typographical style consistent throughout the story?

    3. Are any details of the story given prominence by
       typographical devices? If so, why?




CHAPTER III

FIRES AND ACCIDENTS


=Type of story.= Many newspaper reports of fires and accidents may
be considered as typical examples of narrative and descriptive news
stories of the purely informative type. The essential facts of the news
are presented in a simple, direct, concise manner without any attempt
to give the story any greater interest for the reader than the facts
themselves possess. Such a fire story is that of the “Large Tannery
Fire” (p. 16) and such an accident story is that entitled “Automobile
and Car Collide” (p. 24).

When human life is involved in these events, some newspaper writers
take advantage of the opportunity to add to the interest by developing
the personal, or human interest, elements of the news in the
informative type of story, while at the same time presenting the facts
fully and accurately. Accident stories of this type are those headed
“Entombed Miners” (p. 38) and “Baby Drowns” (p. 42).

Less important fires and accidents that might otherwise go unnoticed,
or be dismissed with a few lines, may have in them some element that
lends itself to the feature, or human interest, treatment. A small fire
story of this type is found on p. 19; a humorous feature story of an
accident is that of the “Child in a Runaway” (p. 25); and a pathetic
human interest story is that of the “Boy Killed by Car” (p. 25).

=Purpose.= Stories of fires and accidents, particularly when such
occurrences result in fatalities, may be written so as to be either
constructive or destructive in their influence upon readers. The
constructive effect lies in emphasis upon those elements that tend (1)
to turn the reader’s attention to preventive measures, (2) to create
sympathy for the victims, or (3) to inspire admiration for heroism or
other virtues. Stories that give prominence to immediate or underlying
causes and responsibility in cases of fires and accidents, as well as
to possible preventive measures, have a helpful effect. Stories that
create sympathy for victims deserving of aid generally result in prompt
offers of relief. Examples of constructive stories are those entitled
“Fire in Stables” (p. 18), “Lodging House Fire” (p. 21), and “Runaway”
(p. 22). The story that aims to satisfy readers’ interest in ghastly
and sensational phases of fatal fires and accidents panders to a morbid
curiosity and inevitably has an unwholesome influence, even though the
facts that it presents are true.

=Treatment of material.= All types of fire and accident stories
give opportunity for spirited narrative and vivid description.
Possible means for lending life and interest to the narrative include
accounts of the disaster, either in direct or indirect quotation
form, as secured by interviews with survivors and eye-witnesses, and
conversation between persons involved.

=Contents of story.= Among the important details to be considered
in analyzing stories of unexpected occurrences, such as fires and
accidents, are: (1) number of lives lost; (2) number of lives
endangered; (3) names of dead and injured; (4) prominent persons and
places involved; (5) character and extent of damage; (6) property
threatened with damage or destruction; (7) cause and responsibility;
(8) investigations; (9) preventive measures against recurrence of
event; (10) probable or actual effects; (11) peculiar and unusual
circumstances; (12) humorous and pathetic incidents. Almost any one
of these details may be the feature of the story, and as such may be
played up in the lead. The space and prominence given to each of these
details are determined by its relative news value.

          *       *       *       *       *

          LARGE TANNERY FIRE

          _Boston Transcript_

          Following an explosion of fuel oil, fire spread
          like a flash through the plant of the George C.
          Vaughn Sole Leather Tannery on Upper Bridge street,
          Salem, shortly before noon today and destroyed
          three large buildings and a power house, with a
          loss estimated from $325,000 to $350,000, covered
          by insurance. Many times the flames leaped to the
          neighboring wooden structures that surround the
          plant, but by the efforts of the entire Salem fire
          department, assisted by men and apparatus from
          Beverly, Peabody and Marblehead, a conflagration
          was narrowly averted.

          More than a quarter million dollars’ worth of sole
          leather was stored on the premises. A. J. Vaughn,
          president of the company, said after the fire that
          $200,000 worth of new stock had recently been
          received and that the old stock, machinery and
          buildings were worth $150,000 in addition, bringing
          the total loss to $350,000.

          The fire, which broke out at 11.15 A. M. in the
          basement of the main tannery building, spread so
          quickly that the employees at work on the upper
          floors had difficulty in escaping to the street.
          Even before the first alarm had been sent in, the
          advancing flames reached a large tank of oil, used
          for fuel in the power house. A heavy explosion
          followed and the fire gained irresistible headway,
          since the power house stood in the centre of the
          plant and was flanked on three sides by the tanning
          houses.

          Unable to check the flames in the plant, the
          firemen bent their energy to keep the fire from
          spreading. Calls for assistance sent to the
          surrounding towns met quick response, and by 12.30
          the blaze was under control.

          The buildings of the plant comprised a two-story
          stone tannery, 200 feet long; a single-story drying
          and rolling house, built of wood, with a frontage
          of 150 feet; and a beam house, also of wood, with a
          frontage of 125 feet. They were grouped on three
          sides of a square surrounding the power house. The
          plant was formerly known as the F. A. Lord tannery,
          but was enlarged and remodelled after its purchase
          by the George C. Vaughn Company.

          *       *       *       *       *

          UNIVERSITY BUILDING BURNS

          _New York Times_

          Three important collections of books and documents,
          two of which were held by their owners to be
          priceless, since they represented the lifework of
          the collectors, were destroyed in the fire which
          swept through the superstructure of the uncompleted
          University Hall on the Columbia University campus
          early yesterday morning.

          While the fire was burning, between 1 and 2
          o’clock, the interest of the student body was
          centred principally in the gymnasium, where there
          was a grand piano and much apparatus to be saved,
          and in the rooms of the Columbia University crew,
          where there were many trophies, oars, and banners.

          In the rush to save athletic trophies, the
          documents in rooms near by were overlooked. They
          were finally pitched out of the windows by firemen
          cleaning up after the fire, and they were made up
          into three great rubbish heaps on the lawns about
          the burned building.

          Before these rubbish heaps a Professor of
          Mathematics and a Professor of Germanic History
          stood yesterday with tears in their eyes, their
          shirtsleeves rolled up for work. They toiled
          through the débris looking for personal papers and
          for notes and documents which they said regretfully
          they feared they could never replace.

          The collections destroyed included all the personal
          library on the history of Germanic civilization
          brought to this country by Dr. Ernst Richard,
          Professor of Germanic History. With Dr. Richard’s
          documents went his personal notes, which he had
          gathered in a lifetime of study. While he stood
          over the rubbish pile in front of the window of
          what had been his office, Dr. F. N. Cole, Professor
          of Mathemetics, searched another big rubbish pile
          near by.

          Dr. Cole also contemplated his loss with deep
          sorrow. In the pile before him were all the
          official documents and records of the American
          Mathematical Association, which had its
          headquarters in the building. Dr. Cole was its
          Secretary, and he had moved the documents from East
          Hall two years ago because he feared that East Hall
          might burn, while University Hall, except for the
          temporary superstructure, was fireproof.

          The documents had been accumulating since the
          association was founded. The files of the first
          ten volumes of its publication, the American
          Mathematical Society’s Bulletin, were destroyed
          together with the stock collection of copies of
          all subsequent volumes. All of Dr. Cole’s personal
          papers were destroyed with the society’s papers.

          The fire, which apparently originated in the
          kitchens behind the Commons eating quarters on
          the main floor, swept through wooden partitions
          separating various offices on that floor, and
          through a temporary wooden roof which had been put
          on against the time when seven more stories should
          be built.

          As the lower floors, which were part of the
          permanent structure, were fireproof, the flames
          did not work down through them, but died out when
          they had consumed the temporary superstructure. The
          gymnasium on the lower floor was unharmed, except
          by water, and the swimming pool below it was ready
          for use yesterday.

          The offices on the upper floor which were
          destroyed included the headquarters of The
          Columbia Spectator, The Jester, the Prison Reform
          Association, and the American Mathematical
          Association, the rooms of the Columbia Crew,
          the Commons Restaurant, and the offices of the
          departments of mathematics and Germanic history.

          The athletic trophies in University Hall, it turned
          out, were of only minor value, having been won
          at training bouts on the Harlem River. The rich
          trophies of the university were kept in another
          building with fireproof walls and floors.

          E. Stagg Whitin, Secretary of the Prison Reform
          Association, joined the downhearted group early in
          the afternoon. “What will Thomas Mott Osborne say
          when he hears of this,” he remarked, as he looked
          over the débris that had been notes and documents.
          “All our work was here,” he said, “all the fruits
          of our years of investigation. And there was even
          material we intended to use in a lawsuit against
          some Connecticut prison labor contractors.

          “I don’t see how we can replace what we have lost.
          The reports of our investigators made up a good
          part of it. We spent our funds preparing this
          material, and the only way we can replace it is to
          raise another fund to do it all over again.”

          The ruin of University Hall’s superstructure
          was not permitted to repose even an hour. Dean
          Frederick Goetze, the university Controller, who
          drove in by automobile from Orient, L. I., on
          hearing of the fire, had wagons loaded with lumber
          on the Campus before the firemen were through
          tearing out the embers. He had 150 men at work
          before noon rebuilding the roof, and had orders
          placed for all material to replace the offices.
          He notified the gymnasium instructors that they
          might hold classes as usual on Monday, and posted
          a notice to students that meals would be served as
          usual in the Commons Monday noon.

          A special announcement which pleased university
          oarsmen was that their annual dinner, scheduled
          for Oct. 21, could be held in the gymnasium.
          Invitations to 1,000 former students had been
          accepted, and postponement would have robbed the
          oarsmen of the rowing season’s great event.

          Coach Jim Rice ordered the rowing squads to report
          on Monday for barge work on the Hudson, remarking
          that real rowing was better than work on the
          machines in the gymnasium.

          The loss on the building was officially placed at
          “less than $100,000,” which, it was said, was fully
          covered by insurance.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FIRE IN STABLES

          _Boston Transcript_

          Fire that partly destroyed the Thornton Stables, a
          five-story brick building at 85 to 95 West Mifflin
          street this morning, has aroused Mayor Curley to
          the immediate necessity of legislation to enable
          the city to raze buildings, without the fear of
          resultant liability, when such buildings have been
          condemned by the building department. He will ask
          the incoming Legislature for such a law.

          For sixteen years the West Mifflin street building
          had been regarded as one of the worst firetraps
          in the city, according to the mayor. In 1898 it
          was condemned and an order was issued by the fire
          commissioner forbidding firemen to enter the
          building in case of fire. During these years the
          building was constantly under inspection by both
          the fire and building departments, and why it was
          not ordered vacated has not been explained. The
          walls were shored up, or strengthened by iron rods,
          as the foundation had settled, and yet the firemen
          realized that, once a fire got under way, the walls
          would not last long, as their thickness was about
          eight inches.

          Before the fire was extinguished today, Mayor
          Curley and Building Commissioner O’Hearn visited
          the scene and discussed with Fire Commissioner
          Grady and Chief McDonough the dangers that exist
          in other buildings throughout the city which have
          been condemned but which are still occupied and are
          regarded as a particular menace in case of fire.
          The party looked over the surrounding property,
          and the Building Commissioner pointed out three
          buildings on the same street and practically
          adjoining the stables that were being torn down
          on his orders. These were ramshackle buildings
          that had been fire menaces for years. It was the
          prevailing opinion that if the stable fire had got
          under greater headway when discovered, and if a
          heavy wind had prevailed, the best efforts of the
          firemen could not have prevented a serious spread
          of the flames. The buildings on the southerly side
          of the stables are all of wood, and the flames
          would have had little difficulty, had they got
          beyond the control of the firemen, in sweeping over
          the site of one removed building to those of most
          inflammable nature used as lodging-houses.

          Mayor Curley directed Fire Commissioner Grady
          to prepare a list of buildings of sufficiently
          dangerous fire risks to warrant orders from
          headquarters forbidding the firemen entering them
          in case of fire. That there are many such buildings
          in various parts of the city of substantial
          proportions was admitted. The fire commissioner
          declared that he had received a legal opinion that
          the city is not justified in tearing down buildings
          which have been condemned, unless the owner or
          owners give their consent. The city has authority,
          however, to vacate buildings. Section four,
          Chapter 550 of the Acts of 1907, provides that the
          building commissioner, or one of his inspectors,
          shall inspect every building which he has reason
          to believe is unsafe or dangerous to life, limb or
          adjoining buildings, and, if he finds it unsafe or
          dangerous, shall notify the owner to secure the
          building, and shall affix in a conspicuous place on
          its walls a notice of its dangerous condition. “The
          commissioner may, with the written approval of the
          mayor, order any building which in his opinion is
          unsafe to be vacated forthwith,” in the words of
          the law.

          Fifty buildings have already been condemned this
          year. Many of them have been removed, but in every
          case the owners have consented to the removal. The
          building commissioner sends his lists of condemned
          buildings to the City Council, which gives hearings
          on the appeal. There is a long list of such
          buildings now pending before the council, and the
          mayor will go before that body at its next meeting
          and urge that the list be given immediate attention.

          The law department has handled two hundred egress
          cases for the building department in the last
          two years, Assistant Corporation Counsel Edward
          T. McGettrick having full charge, and in not a
          single case has the department been obliged to
          vacate after the bill in equity has been filed
          in court. Most of these cases, however, are of
          lodging-houses, the owners preferring to obey
          orders in providing sufficient fire-escapes rather
          than fight the case in the courts.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SMALL FIRE

          _Savannah News_

          A tiny, golden-throated canary bird was the hero of
          a midnight fire in the lobby of the Geiger Hotel on
          Broughton street last night.

          It was due to the bird that the attachés of the
          hotel investigated and found a blaze in the wall
          caused by a defective flue in the rear of the cigar
          stand cases. The loss will amount to between $500
          and $600. The bird hangs in a cage near the cigar
          stand. About 11:30 o’clock S. D. MacMartin noticed
          it suddenly wake from its sleep and flutter noisily
          about the cage. He thought a cat was attempting to
          get the bird and made an investigation. He climbed
          on a chair and a puff of smoke and a blaze shot
          towards him.

          A telephone alarm was sent immediately to fire
          headquarters, and Chemical Company No. 1 answered.
          They extinguished the blaze in a short time. It was
          necessary to chop away the partition, and the cigar
          stand and cases were moved into the lobby of the
          hotel from the wall. The owner of the stand stated
          that his loss would be considerable.

          With all the excitement in the lobby none of the
          guests in the hotel was awakened.

          *       *       *       *       *

          LIVES LOST IN FIRE

          _Chicago Tribune_

          A careless electrician, a gas pocket in a fireproof
          vault, a stab of flame from a blown-out fuse--and a
          deadly “sane Fourth” argument for a city which has
          ceased to need one.

          Such, in brief, was the story read by Coroner
          Hoffman and other official investigators yesterday
          in the ruins of the Pain Fireworks Display
          company’s plant at 1320 Wabash avenue, after an
          explosion of the $5,000 stock of cannon crackers,
          torpedoes, roman candles, skyrockets, and
          pyrotechnical set pieces had wrecked the firm’s own
          building and rocked adjoining structures.

          The electrician, upon whom the authorities are
          inclined to put the blame, was Joseph Johnson,
          employed in the fire sprinkler department of the
          American District Telegraph company.

          Johnson was one of five persons trapped in the
          building and killed. Late in the afternoon the
          bodies of the other four victims--H. B. Thearle,
          president of the company; Miss Florence Hill, his
          personal secretary; Edward Connors, a salesman; and
          R. H. Wolff, the stockman--had been recovered, but
          Johnson’s was not found until night.

          The explosion--or rather the explosions, for
          there were three or four of them at half second
          intervals--occurred shortly before 11 o’clock in
          the morning. Mr. Thearle was sitting at his desk
          in the middle of the building, a deep, narrow,
          one story structure of concrete and steel. At his
          side was Miss Hill, taking dictation in shorthand.
          Connors was busy at an adjoining desk.

          Wolff, the stockkeeper, was in the rear part of
          the basement, in which most of the company’s stock
          was stored. At the front end of the basement two
          electricians were at work--Johnson and Michael
          J. Callahan, his foreman. The job on which the
          electricians were employed centered in the Coca
          Cola building, adjoining the Pain plant, in which
          an outfit of automatic sprinklers was being
          installed.

          Duty called Callahan into the Coca Cola building
          just in time to save his life. A minute after the
          foreman electrician had walked out the front door,
          Thomas Byrnes, sales manager for the fireworks
          company, stepped into the alley at the rear of the
          building. He had taken only a few steps when there
          was a flash and a roar and his feet shot from under
          him.

          As Byrnes fell, a body came sailing out into the
          alley. It stopped short against one of the pillars
          of the south side “L” structure, which runs through
          the alley, and Johnny Costello, the Pain office
          boy, let out a yell of terror. The yell was his
          last for several hours, for he immediately lost
          consciousness.

          At the Wabash avenue end of the building other
          things were happening. With the first explosion the
          big plate glass window disappeared and a mountain
          of flame burst into the street. The street car
          tracks were clear for a hundred yards north and
          south, except for which fact, it is believed, there
          would have been many more killed and injured.

          The flame rolled across the street and scorched the
          front of the building of the Howe Scale company,
          all the windows of which had been shaken out by the
          explosion. On the heels of the dissipated flame
          mountain a pillar of smoke several hundred feet in
          height rolled out of the Pain building.

          Columns of flame and smoke climbed through holes in
          the fireworks store which marked the places where
          two big skylights had been, and an instant later a
          dozen shutters on the north wall of the Coca Cola
          building were afire, and panic-stricken employés,
          many of them girls, were racing for the south fire
          escapes.

          Firemen responding to a 4-11 alarm found the
          bodies of Mr. Thearle, Miss Hill, and Connors just
          inside the front door, all badly burned. Hours
          later the body of Wolff was found in the rear of
          the basement. It was after nightfall when firemen,
          working in the glare of a searchlight, took
          Johnson’s body from the ruins.

          By that time the building had been carefully
          inspected--and it was regarded as a tribute to the
          strength of its reinforced concrete construction
          that there was any of it left to inspect--by
          Coroner Hoffman, J. C. O’Donnell, chief of the
          bureau of fire prevention and public safety, and
          investigators for the new municipal department
          of public service. All were of the opinion that
          Johnson was responsible for the explosion, but the
          blame will not be definitely placed until Monday,
          when a jury impaneled on the spot by Coroner
          Hoffman will hold an inquest.

          O’Donnell, who is third assistant fire marshal,
          planned to combine his investigation with the
          coroner’s. He was satisfied, he said, that the
          Pain company had taken all reasonable precautions
          and that favorable reports made on the place by
          inspectors of his bureau had been justified by
          conditions.

          The building had been specially constructed for the
          storage of fireworks, and had been occupied by the
          company, formerly located in the loop, for three
          years. The basement had been divided into three
          sections by stout partitions, in much the same way
          that bulkheads are built into a ship. Into each of
          the partitions was set a steel door. But there had
          been no time to close the doors.

          “The Pain people thought they were absolutely
          protected against accidents,” said O’Donnell. “This
          goes to prove there is no such thing as absolute
          protection when explosives are being handled.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          LODGING HOUSE FIRE

          _New York World_

          The lives of six persons who died in a lodging
          house fire at No. 1516 Eighth avenue early
          yesterday morning, might have been saved if orders
          issued by the Fire Department last May 27 had been
          obeyed, says a report which J. O. Hammitt, Chief of
          the Bureau of Fire Prevention, made late yesterday
          to Commissioner Robert Adamson.

          Five of the dead persons were identified as Bernard
          Lynde, thirty-five, a laborer; Edward J. Ryan,
          thirty-five, a lunchman; Louis Detter, fifty-three,
          a laborer; a man named Hagan, about fifty; and John
          Cutter, eighty-four, a laborer. The sixth man was
          unidentified.

          There were sixty-five men registered in the hotel
          when Peter Kelly, a watchman, saw the smoke and
          gave an alarm. Sergt. John Butler of the Salvage
          Corps ran to the roof of a neighboring building and
          assisted fifteen of the men to safety.

          Lieut. Reed of Hook and Ladder No. 12, and Hugh
          Bonner, the son of the ex-Chief, mounted extension
          ladders to the top floor and assisted many more to
          the ground. Three bodies were found on the third,
          and three on the top floor.

          Coroner Healy and Fire Marshal Prial believed that
          the fire was caused by a careless smoker.

          Following the issuance of the report, it was
          announced that an investigation would be made by
          the District-Attorney’s office to determine whether
          anyone could be held responsible for the loss of
          life.

          The orders were for the enclosure of an unenclosed
          stairway, up which the fire spread, and for the
          installation of an interior fire alarm system. Both
          orders had been turned over to the legal department
          for enforcement, and work on the stairway enclosure
          was in progress the day before the fire. Plans for
          the fire alarm system were approved Oct. 22.

          Mr. Hammitt stated that the day before the fire an
          inspector learned that the direct communication
          of the lodging house with fire headquarters had
          been cut and ordered its restoration. The report
          says that Peter Loos, the proprietor, called at
          fire headquarters at 9 o’clock and said that the
          communication had not been re-established because
          it was the work of the landlord, but that there had
          been a fire in which “three persons were slightly
          injured.” According to Mr. Hammitt, Edward Brown is
          the owner of the building.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CAUSE OF FIRE

          _New York Times_

          A glowing match, carelessly tossed into a baby
          carriage standing in the hall, is believed to have
          started the fire in which thirteen persons lost
          their lives in the three-story tenement house in
          the rear of 986 North Sixth Street, Williamsburg,
          as told in THE TIMES yesterday. Poor
          lighting in the hallways may have been an indirect
          cause of the fire, according to Tenement House
          Commissioner John J. Murphy.

          As in more than 2,000 structures in the city,
          Commissioner Murphy said, kerosene lamps were used
          to light the halls. Often the lights go out or
          are turned out by 11 o’clock, so that persons who
          go into the buildings later are forced to strike
          matches to find their way. It probably was a match
          struck in this way that started the fire.

          After an inspection of the district about ten days
          ago all the property owners were warned that they
          must keep their lights lighted, according to the
          law. The inspection disclosed that about 70 per
          cent. of the houses were poorly lighted.

          “Prosecutions for violations of the law relating
          to lighting are almost without exception in vain,”
          Commissioner Murphy told a TIMES reporter
          yesterday, “If the owners are taken to court, they
          say that the lights went out, or were blown out.
          The reason for the law is primarily to see that the
          means of exit are lighted. The danger from matches
          used to light the way had not been thought so
          great.”

          Except with regard to lighting, possibly, the
          burned tenement complied with all the provisions of
          the law, the officials said. The fire escapes were
          as prescribed, and it was due to excitement on the
          part of the occupants that they did not use them
          instead of trying to go down the stairs. Only one
          of the windows opening to fire escapes was found
          broken.

          All of the victims were suffocated by smoke. Five
          were members of the family of Michael Blund, and
          two others were boarders with him; three were
          members of the family of Michael Lenko, all of whom
          lived on the top floor. John Whatso and his wife
          and an unidentified man who boarded with them were
          found on the second floor.

          The house was occupied by six families, two on each
          floor. It is owned by John Korno, a banker, of
          667 Grand Street, who owns several other tenement
          houses in the neighborhood. As told in late
          editions of yesterday’s TIMES, flames were
          seen shooting out of the windows by a passerby, who
          turned in an alarm. The firemen, when they arrived,
          found it difficult work, so excited was the crowd
          in front of the burning building.

          The interior of the building was scarcely touched
          by fire. Several of the bodies were lightly
          scorched, but it was apparent that suffocation
          had caused the deaths. On one of the floors the
          tenants had opened the door and left it open
          creating a draft. Apparently all of the victims had
          been asleep when the fire started.

          Commissioner Adamson, Fire Chief Kenlon, Fire
          Marshal Brophy, Deputy Tenement House Commissioner
          Hickey, Assistant District Attorney Wilson, Captain
          Shaw of the Homicide Squad of the Police Department
          and Coroner Wagner made investigations. At first
          it was thought that the fire was of incendiary
          origin, and the theory was that it had been started
          by one of Korno’s tenants who had been evicted.
          The officials were hampered in their investigation
          because most of the tenants were foreigners and
          could not speak English.

          *       *       *       *       *

          RUNAWAY

          _New York Evening Post_

          Dragged from his own horse while trying to stop a
          runaway in Central Park this afternoon, Mounted
          Patrolman Stephen Dowling, although thrown under
          the wheels of a light carriage, jumped to his feet,
          remounted his horse, and, after a chase of ten
          blocks, caught and stopped the other animal. His
          uniform was torn and he received contusions about
          the body, but he remained on duty throughout the
          day. The runaway horse was attached to a light
          runabout, driven by a man and woman, who said they
          were Mr. and Mrs. A. R. Hamilton of No. 775 West
          Ninety-fifth Street.

          They were driving slowly on the West Drive when,
          at Ninetieth Street, the bit broke and the animal
          bolted. Dowling saw the runaway and pursued it on
          his own horse, which overtook the fleeing animal at
          One Hundred and Sixth Street.

          Because of the broken bit it was impossible to
          stop the running horse by catching the bridle, so
          Dowling leaned far out and wrapped his arms around
          the neck of the runaway. He clung in this manner
          for a few minutes, and then, his own horse shying,
          he was dragged from the saddle and fell directly
          beneath the wheels of the runabout. Two wheels
          passed over his chest.

          Although dazed and bruised, Dowling jumped to
          his feet and caught his horse, which stood near,
          mounted and set off at a gallop after the Hamilton
          rig.

          At One Hundred and Sixteenth Street the runaway
          swerved and the light carriage was thrown against
          a truck. Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton were thrown out but
          escaped with a few slight bruises. Dowling had
          almost caught up when this occurred. He halted
          long enough to see that the man and woman were not
          injured and then started after the running horse.
          Near One Hundred and Seventeenth Street he was even
          with the animal and again leaned over and wrapped
          his arms around the horse’s neck. This time his
          own horse did its share of the work, and Dowling’s
          weight soon told on the runaway, which stopped
          within half a block.

          “Just in the day’s work,” said Dowling, when he was
          congratulated.

          *       *       *       *       *

          AUTOMOBILE COLLISION

          _Boston Herald_

          Tossed into a blazing pool of gasoline when two
          touring cars collided and the gas tank of one
          exploded, Miss Alice Cushing, 22, of Nahant, and
          Percy Mason of 765 Washington street, Lynn, were
          probably fatally burned at 8 o’clock last night on
          the Nahant road at Little Nahant.

          Walter Hanley of 11 Moore street, Swampscott, was
          hurled 30 feet with his clothing a mass of flames,
          but saved his own life by plunging into the surf
          and extinguishing the fire about him. Ten other
          passengers in the machines were bruised and shaken
          up, but were able to return home after medical
          attention.

          The accident happened opposite Wilson road, when
          a seven passenger touring car in which were Mr.
          and Mrs. J. Fred Farley of Danvers, their three
          children, Richard, Fred and Helen Farley, and Mrs.
          Farley’s mother, Mrs. O. B. Merton of Danvers,
          turned abruptly to one side to go down upon the
          beach. It was struck from behind by a public
          touring car operated by Hanley and containing six
          passengers.

          Hanley’s machine ploughed into the rear of the
          Farley car, tearing a hole in the gasoline tank.
          The lamps ignited the gasoline and an explosion
          followed which sent several gallons of burning
          fluid upon the road.

          It was into this that Miss Cushing and Mason fell
          when they were thrown from the public machine by
          the impact. The young woman was made unconscious
          by the fall and was lying helpless in the centre
          of the fire when she was rescued with considerable
          difficulty by H. C. Wilcox of Beverly, who was
          driving by on the road. He rolled her in an
          automobile robe and, after extinguishing the
          flames, took her to the Lynn Hospital. There it
          was said there was practically no chance of her
          recovery. She was burned from head to foot and had
          inhaled much of the flames.

          Mason was rescued by Dr. Newton A. Stone of
          Somerville, a Cambridge dentist, who heard the
          explosion and saw the glare of flames while driving
          in his machine farther down the road. He put out
          the fire about Mason with auto robes, assisted
          by the passengers of the public machine who had
          recovered from their shock. The dentist worked over
          him while another man drove his machine to Union
          Hospital, Lynn. Mason’s burns were so severe that
          his name was immediately placed on the danger list.

          In the excitement which followed the wreck, it was
          believed that Hanley, the driver of the public car,
          had been burned alive. A half-hour later, however,
          he was discovered in a cottage off Wilson road. His
          clothing was ignited by the explosion, and he was
          hurled over the road upon the sand, his clothes a
          mass of flames.

          He had to run toward the surf, but was seriously
          burned before he could reach the water, some 50
          yards away. After he had extinguished the flames
          himself, he made his way to a cottage and sank
          exhausted on the piazza. Later he was removed to
          Lynn Hospital, where it was stated his burns were
          serious, but probably would not prove fatal. He was
          burned about the face and upper part of the body
          and the flames had entered his mouth, burning his
          tongue and throat.

          Before the Nahant fire department could reach the
          scene both automobiles were destroyed. The Farley
          machine had been badly wrecked by the collision
          and the public car was telescoped. In the latter
          machine were Mr. and Mrs. Frank Hanley of Lynn,
          Arthur Wright of Fiske avenue, Lynn, and Leo Sale
          of Lynn, besides those who were burned. They were
          all more or less bruised.

          The Farley party narrowly escaped being burned and
          were cut and bruised when they were thrown from
          their seats. Mrs. Farley told the police that she
          held up her hand to signal the other machine as her
          husband turned his auto toward the beach. Hanley
          was in no condition to discuss the accident. He is
          said to have been driving at about 18 miles an hour.

          Miss Cushing lived on Willow road, Nahant, and
          was employed as a waitress in the Colonial Café,
          Nahant. Mason roomed at 765 Washington street,
          Lynn, and for many years was a resident of Peabody.
          He was employed in a Nahant restaurant.

          Mr. Farley is a machine manufacturer in Danvers.

          *       *       *       *       *

          AUTOMOBILE AND CAR COLLIDE

          _New York Tribune_

          George C. Hurlbut, the aged librarian of the
          American Geological Society, and his daughter,
          Miss Ilione Hurlbut, were seriously injured last
          night in a collision between the automobile in
          which they were riding and a surface car in the
          86th street transverse road in Central Park. Father
          and daughter were removed to the Presbyterian
          Hospital, where it was said that the skull of each
          was fractured. Miss Hurlbut’s right arm was broken.
          Both were unconscious when they were received
          at the hospital, and it was said they could not
          recover.

          Mr. Hurlbut lives at No. 560 West End avenue and
          is seventy years old. His daughter, Ilione, is
          thirty-five years old and is his assistant in his
          work. Yesterday afternoon they engaged William
          Agg, of 86th street and Broadway, to take them for
          a drive in the Fifth avenue section, saying they
          would afterward have him drop them at No. 106 West
          55th street, where they intended to have their
          Christmas dinner with William Hurlbut, a nephew of
          Mr. Hurlbut.

          Agg started toward Fifth avenue by way of the
          transverse road. Less than half of the distance
          to Fifth avenue had been covered when he heard a
          westbound car approaching. The automobile was at
          that moment opposite the Park Department workshops.
          Agg attempted to turn out, but the slippery road
          and rails caused the rear wheels of the automobile
          to skid. Both the car and the automobile were
          travelling at a rapid rate, and the front of the
          car struck the body of the machine, overturning
          it. Before the motorman could bring his car to
          a stop the automobile had been crumpled up like
          cardboard, and the aged librarian and his daughter
          lay unconscious among the wreckage. Agg had saved
          himself by jumping before the car struck the
          machine.

          The car was crowded, and there was intense
          excitement among the passengers, who were shaken up
          and struck by flying glass. Policeman Talt heard
          the noise made by the collision and immediately
          telephoned for an ambulance. Before it arrived,
          however, a passing automobile was pressed into
          service, and the injured man and woman were placed
          in it and hurried to the Presbyterian Hospital.

          Lieutenant Arnett, of the Arsenal station, ordered
          the arrest of the motorman of the car, James
          Gannon, of No. 419 Third avenue, and Agg, who lives
          at No. 160 Manhattan avenue.

          Mr. Hurlbut has been the librarian of the American
          Geological Society, at No. 15 West 81st street, for
          twenty-five years, and is considered the foremost
          authority on that class of work in this country.
          He was born at Charleston, S. C., about seventy
          years ago, and before he came here was engaged in
          geological study and writing in San Francisco and
          was president of the Mercantile Library.

          The library of the American Geological Society
          consists of 40,000 volumes, and is second only in
          completeness to the geological library at Paris.
          Mr. Hurlbut is also editor of the monthly bulletin
          which the society publishes. George Greenough,
          the secretary of the society, was greatly shocked
          by the news of the accident to Mr. Hurlbut and
          his daughter. He said last night that the loss of
          the librarian’s services, even for a short time,
          would be an irreparable loss to science and to the
          society.

          Since the death of his wife, eight years ago, Mr.
          Hurlbut has lived with his daughter, Ilione. They
          occupied a suite in the building at No. 560 West
          End avenue, and Miss Hurlbut acted as her father’s
          assistant.

          He has two nephews, William J. Hurlbut, author of
          the play “The Fighting Hope,” now at the Stuyvesant
          Theatre, and Stephen A. Hurlbut, professor of
          Greek at Barnard College. Mr. Hurlbut’s brother is
          said to have been the owner and editor of “The New
          York World” before it became the property of Mr.
          Pulitzer.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHILD IN RUNAWAY

          _Boston Advertiser_

          NEW YORK, Dec. 23--Walter Jackson is a lucky baby.
          His parents admit that he is something more than
          that, but take it as things go in this world of
          chance, he’s lucky.

          A horse attached to a delivery wagon was standing
          in front of 942 Columbus ave. One of the front
          wheels was tied to a rear wheel. Jacob Katz, the
          driver, was in the building.

          Along came a fat boy with a Christmas tree on his
          shoulder and longings in his heart. He stopped to
          look into a shop window and swung the tree around
          sweeping the face of the horse. The horse ran away.

          When he got to the corner of 87th st. the horse
          took to the sidewalk.

          On the sidewalk, along with many other shoppers,
          were Walter Jackson and his wife. Just ahead
          of them was Miss Rose Williams, and just ahead
          of Miss Williams was a baby carriage, and in
          the baby carriage was another Walter Jackson,
          three-months-old and lucky.

          The first Walter Jackson was knocked down and his
          face looks now as if the horse stepped on it. Mrs.
          Jackson was knocked down and the wagon ran over
          her. Miss Williams was knocked down also.

          As the rear wheel of the delivery wagon passed,
          it caught the baby carriage; the baby stuck, and
          in another minute was going just as fast as the
          delivery wagon. Walter Jackson the second, stuck to
          his carriage and incidentally to the delivery wagon.

          Half way down the block the wagon struck a sidewalk
          showcase and the crash of glass further frightened
          the horse. He plunged back to the street, going
          through a line of Christmas trees with the wagon
          and the baby carriage.

          Once through the trees, he smashed into an L pillar
          and there parted company with delivery wagon and
          baby carriage.

          The wagon parted company with itself, and about
          all there was left of the baby carriage was that
          very limited portion of it immediately adjacent to
          Walter Jackson.

          The baby looked much mussed up, but when Dr. Monaco
          of the Polyclinic Hospital examined him there
          wasn’t a mark to be found.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BOY KILLED BY CAR

          _San Francisco Examiner_

          NEW YORK, December 17.--“Over on Broadway there’s
          a regular Santy Claus,” said 10-year-old Johnny
          Nugent to his chum, 7-year-old Eddie Bowler, as
          school let out on the East Side this afternoon. “I
          never seen no Santy Claus--only pictures. Did you?
          Let’s go over?”

          They put their books away, Johnny in his home,
          Eddie in his. Then they trudged, skipping curbs and
          whistling, across to the region of a department
          store at Broadway and Thirty-fourth street.

          “I was a kid last year,” said Johnny. “Me mother
          couldn’t let me come here and I dasn’t go without
          asking.”

          They didn’t have any money, of course. Johnny’s
          mother is a widow and Eddie’s folks have little to
          spare for the children. But an idea seized Johnny;
          he would start earning money at once. He went to a
          newsboy, and the latter, with the freemasonry of
          the streets, “lent” him two papers to sell. In a
          moment he was yelling “Extry--All about the murder
          trial!”

          Eddie helped him to yell.

          A customer beckoned from across the street. Johnny
          darted toward him just in front of the Hotel
          Martinique. A Broadway surface car loomed up
          suddenly. There was a little cry, then the forward
          pair of wheels ran over the boy and his body became
          jammed in the rear wheels.

          While a tremendous crowd of shoppers surrounded the
          car, some men--and Eddie--crawled underneath. The
          men came out with Johnny’s body. His little chum
          had his torn cap and the two evening papers.

          In the police station, before a group of policemen
          who wept, Eddie told the whole story while he clung
          to the battered relics.

          “Mr. Lieutenant,” he asked at the end, “do you
          think Johnny will get alive again?”

          “Maybe Santa Claus will take care of him,” said Dr.
          Gilhooley gravely, and he turned quickly away.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUBWAY ACCIDENT

          _New York Times_

          Seven persons were killed and eighty-five injured
          shortly before 8 o’clock yesterday morning when a
          blast of dynamite in the excavation for the new
          Seventh Avenue subway carried away all the plank
          thoroughfare between Twenty-third and Twenty-fifth
          Streets, sweeping down into the great hole a
          crowded trolley car and a brewery automobile truck.

          That the toll of dead and injured was not many
          times greater was due to the fact that the
          supports of the subway structure gave way slowly,
          affording an opportunity for hundreds of persons
          who were on their way to work to scurry to side
          streets and to the walks which were at the sides
          of the excavation. Most of those injured were in
          the Seventh Avenue trolley car, which was of the
          closed type and was north-bound. When the tracks
          sagged the car slid into the hole. It crumpled
          like pasteboard when it struck the tangle of iron,
          wood, and rock in the bottom of the excavation. Two
          of the persons killed were passengers in the car.
          All the others were laborers in the tunnel caught
          beneath the wreckage.

          Within an hour after the accident happened seven
          independent investigations to place the blame
          were under way. These inquiries were started by
          District Attorney Perkins, the Fire Department,
          the Public Service Commission, Coroner Feinberg,
          the contracting company, the State Industrial
          Commission, and the Street Railway Company.

          The investigators said that before the
          responsibility could be determined positively
          they would need the testimony of August Midnight.
          Midnight is the licensed blaster who set the
          dynamite charge. He was seen after the accident,
          but disappeared, and up to a late hour last night
          had not been found. The police sent out a general
          alarm for his arrest.

          According to Policeman Daniel O’Shay of the West
          Twentieth Street Station, who was standing at
          Twenty-fourth Street and Seventh Avenue, it was
          about 7:50 o’clock when he heard the explosion,
          which was followed by a sudden rising and then a
          sagging of the temporary roadway in Seventh Avenue.
          A few seconds later the structure gave way and with
          a crash settled down into the big hole. The street
          car was directly in front of O’Shay, and he saw
          it drop with the crumbling roadway, and heard the
          cries of the terror-stricken passengers.

          O’Shay instantly ran to a fire box and turned in an
          alarm, after which he notified Police Headquarters
          by telephone. When he got back to the accident to
          do his part in the work of rescue, the scene down
          deep in the excavation was appalling.

          All that was left of the car, it appeared, was the
          roof and the steel trucks. The passengers inside,
          flung together in a confused mass, were screaming
          and struggling. On top of the debris, not far from
          the Twenty-fourth Street side of the wreckage, was
          the body of a stout, well-dressed woman. Persons
          on the sidewalk more than thirty feet above her
          saw that she was injured terribly. She was still
          alive when taken from the excavation, but died in
          a few minutes. The body was identified as that of
          Mrs. Martha V. Newton, 67 years old, of 243 Waverly
          Place.

          Fire ladders were let down into the hole, and
          firemen and policemen, reckless of danger to
          themselves, scrambled over the debris to rescue
          the injured and recover the dead. Mrs. Newton was
          one of the first of those carried up the ladders
          to the sidewalk and into the National Cloak and
          Suit Company, where she died. This company, which
          operates a model welfare department for the benefit
          of its 4,100 employes, has an up-to-date hospital
          connected with its plant, and to this infirmary
          scores of the injured were taken to have their
          wounds dressed.

          Ambulances from all parts of the city were called,
          and soon there was a force of thirty surgeons
          and as many more nurses at work. Several hundred
          emergency men employed by the contractors were
          hurried into the excavation to facilitate the
          rescue. Mayor Mitchel, Chairman McCall of the
          Public Service Commission, Police Commissioner
          Woods, District Attorney Perkins, and other city
          and county officials arrived early and witnessed
          the removal of some of the injured and the dead.

          The rescuers found many wounded people and one dead
          man in the wreckage of the street car. The dead
          man was Louis Krugman, a garment worker, of 308
          East Eighth Street. Another of those in the car
          died soon after being removed from the wreckage.
          The worst injured were taken into the emergency
          hospital of the Suit Company, while others were
          treated in the streets by ambulance doctors and
          sent to their homes.

          Two priests from St. Colomba’s Catholic Church,
          Fathers Rogers and Higgins, descended into the
          excavation and aided the rescuers. William
          Dennison, the subway engineer who was taken to
          St. Vincent’s Hospital and was expected to die,
          was found with a girder across his chest, but was
          conscious, and Father Higgins anointed him before
          he was carried away. When a stimulant was offered
          to Dennison to alleviate his suffering, he refused,
          saying he did not drink.

          The stifling odor of gas from broken mains hampered
          the rescuers. The Department of Water Supply, Gas
          and Electricity had employes at the cavity in
          eight minutes after the accident. They found that
          one twenty-four-inch high pressure fire main and
          several six-inch water mains had been broken, and
          that the water was rising in the excavation. Within
          half an hour they had all the high pressure mains
          closed, and thirty minutes later arrangements had
          been made through adjoining mains so that the high
          pressure system was ready for use. The smaller
          mains were shut off by the subway contractors, and
          temporary services were installed to meet the needs
          of the residents of the block.

          Through the fortunate presence at Seventh Avenue
          and Twenty-third Street of a patrolman for the
          Consolidated Gas Company, the gas was shut off
          soon. Two mains had been broken; but on account of
          the experience in the construction of the Boston
          subway, when men were asphyxiated by escaping gas
          in a similar accident, the gas mains are laid along
          the curb in all the present construction in New
          York; so that while a considerable amount of gas
          escaped on the street it did no damage.

          Fire Chief Kenlon directed much of the rescue work,
          and fifty additional firemen without apparatus were
          called out as soon as the nature of the emergency
          was known. Forty-four alarm boxes were put out of
          commission by the breaking of wires when the street
          went down, but service was restored with overhead
          wires an hour later.

          Immediately after the arrival of Acting Chief
          Inspector Dillon, who directed the police reserves,
          called from all parts of Manhattan and the Bronx,
          tenants were ordered to quit the houses in Seventh
          Avenue from Twenty-third to Twenty-fifth Streets
          until the authorities decided whether it was safe
          for them to return. At 7 o’clock at night they were
          permitted to return to their homes.

          Acting Police Inspector Joseph Conroy, in
          conjunction with officials of the construction
          company, sent policemen at night throughout the
          five boroughs to the homes of 200 employes on the
          company’s payroll. All of the men were accounted
          for except two--J. X. Zavina of 300 Avenue A and
          John McCormick of 317 Bowery. McCormick had been
          reported dead earlier in the day. At the address
          given for Zavina it was said that no man of that
          name lived there.

          The Seventh Avenue car service was suspended south
          of Thirty-second Street, and it will be at least a
          week, it is said, before service is resumed below
          that point.

          The thousands of spectators who crowded as near
          the great cavity as they could during the morning
          and gave the police reserves a hard task at the
          danger zone ropes, became alarmed when it was
          reported that dynamite was still beneath the fallen
          structure and that more explosions might follow.
          Twelve sticks of unexploded dynamite were carried
          up at one time, and the firemen took charge of it.

          The engineers later said that there was no more
          dynamite in the cavity, and that the twelve sticks
          had been carried down early in the morning by a
          powder man who was to explode them in small blasts
          after the big explosion at 8 o’clock. The rules
          were strict regarding the handling of dynamite, the
          company officials said, and they were sure that
          there was no further danger to the lives of the
          rescuers after the twelve sticks had been taken out.

          Colonel William Hayward of the Public Service
          Commission stood at the edge of the great hole and
          pointed to the crumpled wooden car.

          “Look at that car,” he said. “That’s what we ought
          to investigate, for before you is a picture of
          what is going to happen when one of the old wooden
          cars on the elevated takes a jump to the street.
          I fought against those old cars going on the
          elevated, but I was voted down. I will always fight
          them or any other sort of wooden cars for New York
          traffic.

          “If that car down there had been a steel car I do
          not believe a person would have been hurt. At least
          the passengers would not have been crushed.”

          The contract for the subway work affected by
          the accident was awarded originally to Canavan
          Brothers, but was taken over by the United States
          Realty and Improvement Company on Dec. 31, 1913.
          The price was fixed at $2,401,306.75. The job was
          75 per cent. completed yesterday morning. The part
          is designated officially as Section 5, Route 4 and
          38 and extends from midway between Sixteenth and
          Seventeenth Streets to midway between Thirtieth and
          Thirty-first Streets.

          The company also has a contract for the section
          from Commerce to Sixteenth Street, and for Section
          2 of the Broadway subway from Twenty-sixth
          to Twenty-eighth Street. The total amount of
          all subway contracts held by the company is
          $6,996,037.75, of which 40 per cent. has been paid.
          The contractors are under a $75,000 bond for the
          completion of the construction and 15 per cent.
          of the payment will be withheld until the work is
          accepted.

          The contractors are liable under the provisions of
          the workmen’s compensation law for death and injury
          of employes. The company is insured, according to
          officials, against losses by other accidents.

          The United States Realty and Improvement Company
          has enormous assets. Its capital is $30,000,000.
          Among the realty properties listed in its name are
          the Flatiron Building, Broadway and Fifth Avenue;
          17 Battery Place, 85 and 87 Beaver Street, 96 and
          98 Mercer Street, 67 and 69 Wall Street, 91 and
          93 Wall Street, 123-27 West Twentieth Street,
          124-28 West Twentieth Street, 112 West Twenty-first
          Street, 118 West Twenty-first Street, 122-26 West
          Twenty-first Street, 41-45 East Twenty-second
          Street, 128-32 West Thirtieth Street, 202-08 West
          Thirty-seventh Street, 111-19 Broadway, 304-12
          Fourth Avenue, 400 Fifth Avenue, 494-98 Seventh
          Avenue.

          Following are the officials of the company which
          faces enormous damage suits for the accident:
          President, Wilson S. Kinnear; Secretary, Richard
          G. Babbage; Treasurer, Byron M. Fellows;
          Directors--Harry S. Black, Chairman; R. G. Babbage,
          Frank A. Vanderlip, John F. Harris, William A.
          Poillon, John D. Crimmins, P. A. Valentine, Harry
          Bronner, William A. Merriman, W. S. Kinnear, C. E.
          Hermann, F. W. Upham, Franklin Murphy, and B. M.
          Fellows. The main offices are at 111 Broadway.

          The Superintendent is E. A. Little. C. H. Stengle
          is chief engineer. S. S. Jones is in charge
          of the construction work which collapsed. The
          supervising engineer is B. C. Collier, and the
          engineer immediately in charge of the division
          which caved in is H. R. Jacobson.

          Supervising the work for the Public Service
          Commission are Alfred Craven, chief engineer for
          the commission; Robert Ridgeway, supervising
          engineer in charge of subway construction; Andrew
          Veitch, in charge of the section, and Stephen
          Koronski, immediately in charge of the division
          that caved in.

          *       *       *       *       *

          RUN DOWN BY TRAIN

          _Boston Traveler_

          In a race with an express train over Lyman’s bridge
          on the Southern division of the Boston & Maine
          railroad at Waltham, Gerald Ross, 15-year-old son
          of Herbert Ross of 95 Carroll street, Waltham,
          was overtaken and instantly killed yesterday. A
          companion, Kenneth Harrison, 11 years old, of 145
          Fourth street, was struck by a cylinder of the
          engine and suffered a broken arm. His brother,
          Norman Harrison, 14 years old, escaped uninjured.

          The boys stood in the middle of the single track on
          Lyman’s bridge, a long trestle over which trains
          cross a small stream. They were watching a group
          of their friends sporting in Lyman’s pond, and did
          not notice the approach of the 4 o’clock express
          from Boston.

          The locomotive’s warning whistle startled them as
          the train rounded a bend 100 yards away. The bridge
          was too narrow for the boys to remain on it safely
          while the train passed. To cling to the girders and
          hang suspended over the rocky bed of the stream 25
          feet below while the express shook the trestle was
          hazardous. As the locomotive bore down upon them
          the three boys started to race toward the end of
          the bridge.

          The engineer shut off steam, but the locomotive
          continued to gain on the fleeing trio, the whistle
          shrieking the warning to the boys to jump from the
          trestle.

          Norman Harrison realized his danger and leaped to
          the ground, 12 feet below. Kenneth turned to the
          side of the track and was about to jump when the
          engine hit his arm and threw him from the trestle.
          Gerald Ross raced on between the rails, hoping to
          reach the end of the bridge. The engine struck him
          and he died instantly.

          Ross would have entered the Waltham high school as
          a freshman this morning.

          A police ambulance carried Kenneth Harrison to the
          Waltham Hospital. Norman Harrison escaped with
          bruises.

          *       *       *       *       *

          TRAIN DERAILED

          _Milwaukee Journal_

          Two hundred people narrowly escaped death or
          serious injury early Monday when the engine on
          passenger train No. 13, on the Fond du Lac division
          of the Chicago and Northwestern road, due in
          Milwaukee at 12:10 a. m., going over forty miles
          an hour, jumped the track two miles north of Lake
          Shore Junction.

          The tire on one of the rear drive-wheels came off,
          throwing the locomotive from the track. It tore
          along for over 150 yards, across a trestle, and
          just as the nose of the engine turned down the
          fifteen-foot embankment, Engineer Frank Purcell
          brought the train to a stop.

          The train was over a half hour late and was
          pounding hard to make up time. But few of the
          people knew of their danger, the rattle of stone
          and gravel against the cars being the only sign
          that something was wrong.

          Some of the passengers dared the biting cold and
          walked to the end of the car line, four miles away,
          but most of them remained to be brought into the
          city at 4 a. m. by a relief train.

          The train blocked traffic on the Fond du Lac
          division until a late hour Monday. Several trains
          were held up, both north and south bound. The
          wrecker, which did not get out until 4 a. m., took
          over two hours to get the engine on the rails and
          bring the train into town.

          Hurrying to Milwaukee to the bedside of Mrs. Grant
          Gilson, 3307 Western-av, were her husband and her
          mother, Mrs. W. Gilson. When the train was wrecked,
          the two were made nearly frantic by the information
          that it would be two hours or more before a relief
          train would arrive. With a few others, they
          tramped, unmindful of the stinging cold, to Lake
          Shore Junction, thinking they could make street
          car connections there. By good luck they caught a
          southbound freight on the Lake Shore division.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FATAL RAILROAD WRECK

          _Milwaukee Sentinel_

          JERSEY CITY, N. J., Nov. 6.--Four were killed
          and over 200 were injured in the wreck of a
          Philadelphia local on the Pennsylvania railway,
          which ran through an open switch at Brunswick
          street junction, crashed into a dead yard engine
          and piled up four cars in a heap of tangled
          wreckage on Saturday.

          Every ambulance, police patrol and fire wagon
          available has been utilized to remove the injured,
          many of whom are seriously hurt. The wreck took
          place on the elevated structure upon which the
          Pennsylvania enters Jersey City, and the fire
          department was needed to get the injured to the
          street level that they might be hurried to the
          hospitals.

          The following are the dead:

          JOHN MONROE, Perth Amboy, engineer.

          JOHN M’CLURE, Newark, N. J., fireman.

          JOHN SPILLE, Trenton, N. J., engineer.

          STENCIO DIOGOSIE, Jersey City, track walker.

          The list of injured, made at the various hospitals,
          follows:

          Max Donelson, 42 years old, New York, bruised about
          body; unidentified man, suffering from shock,
          probable internal injury; F. H. Clark, Metuchen, N.
          J., cut about face and head; George E. Siddell, 30
          years old, Elizabeth, N. J.; Miss A. P. Rook, 24
          years old, Elizabeth; A. C. Allison, 29 years old,
          New York; George L. Tench, 35 years old, Newark; W.
          E. Wing, 27 years old, Allendale, N. J.

          Fireman Daniel Meade, Newark, of the light engine,
          jumped as the trains came together and was unhurt.
          The police, on investigation, found a broken rail
          on track No. 3 at the scene of the accident, and
          agreed that this was the cause of the wreck.

          Towerman Williamson, who had been arrested, charged
          with throwing the switch and bringing the train and
          engine together, was at once discharged.

          The train left Philadelphia at 7:58 Saturday
          morning and was filled with commuters going to
          their work.

          Engineer Monroe of the passenger train was running
          at a good rate of speed to make up time, and
          neither he nor his fireman had a chance to jump and
          save themselves.

          The engine of the passenger train toppled over,
          part of it lying across the trestle work, in
          imminent danger of crashing to the street.

          A passing policeman, hearing the crash, turned in
          the alarm, and the reserves and all ambulances
          possible were soon at hand, extricating the
          injured, which was a difficult task. Most of them
          were pinned down by the wreckage.

          In the mail car, which was directly behind the
          engine, was more than $1,000,000 in specie, which
          was being transferred to New York by the Adams
          Express company. A special guard was hurriedly
          placed around this car.

          When the wreck occurred, the Jersey City station
          was crowded with men and women about to leave for
          Princeton for the Princeton-Dartmouth football
          game. This crowd was thrown into great confusion
          until the officials informed them that they might
          proceed to their destination via the Jersey Central
          railroad, the Pennsylvania tracks being blocked.

          At the hospitals it was reported that none of those
          taken there were seriously hurt, and that all would
          recover. The bodies of the dead have been taken
          to Hughes’ morgue. The officials of the road are
          investigating the cause of the wreck.

          That a hundred were not killed was due to the
          equipment of the cars. They were of steel, with
          steel beams and concrete flooring into which the
          seat frames were set. When the cars toppled over,
          there was no splintering of wood, and when the
          windows were shattered, the glass flew outward.
          Nearly all of the injured, as soon as their hurts
          were attended to, left the hospitals and resumed
          their journey without giving their names.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FATAL RAILROAD COLLISION

          _Milwaukee News_

          New York, Dec. 31.--Spencer Trask, one of the
          leading financiers of the United States, was killed
          today by a freight train running into the rear of
          the New York Central passenger train on which he
          occupied the drawing room section at the rear end
          of the last car.

          The accident occurred near Croton, N. Y. One other
          passenger was seriously injured, and the negro
          porter of the sleeping car was also badly hurt.

          Mr. Trask, who was coming into the city from his
          home at Saratoga, was dressing in his compartment
          when the freight train plowed into the heavy
          passenger train, which is known as the Montreal
          Express. When his torn body was removed from the
          wreckage, it was found that he had only partly
          dressed himself.

          The express had been stopped by a block signal, and
          why the freight behind it was not stopped has not
          been explained. The freight struck with such force
          as to demolish the rear end of the last sleeper,
          telescoping the front end with the sleeper ahead.

          Many of the occupants of the five sleepers had not
          fully dressed, and they were precipitated, half
          clad, into snow banks, with the temperature far
          below the freezing point.

          Wrecking and relief trains were dispatched from the
          Harlem yards of the New York Central, and officials
          of the company hurried to the scene. Mr. Trask’s
          body was removed to the Croton morgue, and the
          injured passenger and porter were cared for by the
          local doctors. The passenger was unable to tell his
          name.

          Those injured were for the most part in the smoking
          compartment at the extreme rear of the sleeper,
          where a group of passengers were gathered as the
          train proceeded down the river. Mr. Trask was on
          his way to this city from his home in Saratoga.
          Engineer Flanagan of the freight train stuck by his
          locomotive, but escaped serious injury.

          Failure of a brakeman to walk far enough to the
          rear of the stalled Montreal train to flag the
          freight in time, is said to have caused the smashup.

          The news of the banker’s death had no effect on the
          stock exchange, where prices were slightly above
          the close last night.

          Spencer Trask, who was born here in 1844, entered
          the banking business immediately on his graduation
          from Princeton. His financial acumen was quickly
          recognized, and he soon became a power in the
          banking world.

          Mr. Trask was among the first to recognize the
          genius of Thomas A. Edison, and identified himself
          with the Edison electric enterprises. The banker
          was a director in many railroads and realty
          companies and was deeply interested in educational
          and philanthropic societies. Several years ago he
          bought and reorganized The New York Times. He was
          president of the National Arts club and a member of
          numerous other prominent New York clubs. Mr. Trask
          was married in 1874 to Miss Katrina Nichols.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The following two stories should be
          compared as reports of the same accident given in
          two New York morning papers._

          DIVERS DIE IN SHIP’S HOLD

          (1)

          _New York Tribune_

          Death followed triumphant achievement with terrible
          swiftness for three men yesterday, when they
          were smothered in the hold of the steamship H.
          M. Whitney, of the Metropolitan outside line to
          Boston, which they had helped to raise only a few
          hours before after a month of hard work in the
          raging currents of Hell Gate.

          One, a diver, went down into the hold to see if a
          patch he had put on the wrecked bottom from the
          outside was holding well. He died, it is supposed,
          as the poisonous gases rose about him, and two
          more, going after him to see why he did not return,
          met the same fate.

          It was not until three men lay dead in the fetid
          hold, suffocated by the gases that the cargo of
          hides, beer and perhaps half a hundred other things
          gave off, that a glimmering of reason seemed to
          come to those in charge of the work. Then the
          needless sacrifice of more lives was prevented.
          Some one took charge, and men equipped with divers’
          helmets rescued two more men who had gone down for
          their comrades, and brought up the bodies of the
          dead.

          Augustus Bjorklund was the diver who brought about
          the fatal ending of the day’s work. No one knows
          just why he went down into the hold, warned as he
          had been to beware of the poisonous gases that
          always accumulate when a vessel has lain long in
          the water, but the officials of the Merritt-Chapman
          Wrecking Company suppose that he wanted to see his
          work from inside.

          Reports of what happened next on the Whitney were
          vague. While the men were going down and dying, no
          one seemed to know anything. There was no panic;
          there was no excitement. Michael Menus, one of the
          wrecking crew, apparently followed Bjorklund to see
          if anything was wrong, and died as he reached the
          bottom of the hold, falling unconscious from the
          ladder he descended. Then Herman Fabricius went
          down, and he, too, died almost at once.

          John Hanson was the next man to go down, with
          a rope and some caution this time, for it was
          beginning to be realized that something was amiss.
          Hanson came back alive, but unconscious. Captain
          Kivlin having realized that a disaster had come
          upon the ship, divers went down and saved Hanson’s
          life, bringing up the bodies of the three dead men
          besides.

          That account of the tragedy is as much as could be
          gleaned with any certainty yesterday. It was hard
          enough to get aboard the Whitney at all, and no one
          there seemed to know much. The coroner’s office
          made a brief investigation yesterday afternoon,
          and the bodies were removed to an undertaking
          establishment in West 24th street. The police found
          out little more than the casual spectators who
          thronged the pier.

          The H. M. Whitney went aground in Hell Gate on
          Middle Four Reef just a month ago yesterday, and in
          the early morning she was floated after long and
          hard efforts. It had been a hard job, and those
          who had accomplished it were more than happy. The
          ship had been brought down to East 102d street,
          and about all the work that was being done was
          to keep the pumps working. The lighters with the
          huge derricks lay alongside, and when the tragedy
          occurred many of the men in charge of the work were
          at luncheon.

          None of the men who died had orders to go down into
          the hold. This was dwelt on with much emphasis by
          the officials of the wrecking company. Captain
          Kivlin, who was in charge of the work, was arrested
          and taken to the Harlem court, where Magistrate
          Herrman refused to do more than remand him to the
          coroner. Apparently no one in charge of the work
          could have foreseen the accident and no one could
          be held responsible.

          Both Bjorklund and Fabricius lived at Stapleton,
          Staten Island, and Menus lived at 1 Atlantic
          avenue, Brooklyn. Supt. Kivlin said that Bjorklund
          was one of the most experienced divers in the
          company’s employ and he couldn’t understand how
          the man happened to venture into the gas-ridden
          hold without testing it for the poisonous vapors.
          “With such a mixed cargo as the Whitney is carrying
          submerged for thirty-one days, it was certain to be
          almost fatal for any one to go into the hold until
          it had been thoroughly ventilated,” he said. “He
          should have taken the precaution to drop down a
          lantern before he went down himself.”

          Capt. Hone of the Henry M. Whitney said yesterday
          that the damage to the steamer can be repaired very
          quickly when she gets into drydock. As a result of
          his steamer’s misfortune the Government has decided
          to put a bell buoy on the reef.

          The pilots of the Sound steamers breathed easier
          yesterday afternoon when they approached Hell Gate
          and found the steamer out of the channel. The
          larger vessels, especially the Fall River Line
          steamers, have had a tight squeeze sometimes, and
          in foggy weather it was exceedingly dangerous to
          attempt the passage.

          (2)

          _New York Sun_

          Nobody was hurt when the steamboat H. M. Whitney
          went on Nigger Point reef, Hell Gate, in a fog
          a month ago, but three men were killed on her
          yesterday an hour after she had been raised. She
          had been pumped out by the Merritt-Chapman Wrecking
          Company and floated over to the foot of East 102
          street. Three of the wrecking crew went down the
          forward hatchway into the hold, were overcome by
          carbonic acid fumes and were taken out dead.

          One was August Bjorklund, a veteran diver, who had
          patched up one of the big holes in the side of
          the steamer. He took with him Herman Fabricius, a
          blacksmith, and Michael Menus, a laborer. Supt.
          Thomas Kivlin, in charge of the wreckers, and Capt.
          George Hone of the Henry M. Whitney had warned all
          the wreckers and members of the crew that it would
          be unsafe to venture into the hold until the air
          had been purified.

          The Whitney’s cargo consisted mainly of green
          hides, miscellaneous freight made up largely of
          rubber, resin and molasses, and a quantity of coal.
          Some 500 tons had been taken out and yesterday
          1,800 tons remained. The divers had patched the
          hole in the boat’s bottom, and yesterday morning,
          having pumped her out, the wreckers got two immense
          chains under the bow and stern of the Whitney, and
          she was lifted almost out of the water by four
          powerful floating derricks. Shortly before noon the
          derricks headed for the Manhattan shore and an hour
          later the freighter was lying at the foot of 102d
          street.

          The derricks had scarcely been tied up there when
          Bjorklund and his two assistants went down the
          second forward hatchway. No one saw them go, but a
          few minutes later one of the wreckers, happening
          to pass the hatchway, looked down into the hold
          and saw the three men stretched out on the bottom.
          Supt. Kivlin was notified, and he called the
          members of his force and the crew of the steamer
          around him.

          “The man who goes down after those men takes his
          life in his hand, but there ought to be somebody
          here brave enough to do it,” said Kivlin. “If we
          can get them out of that rotten gas promptly we may
          save them.”

          There wasn’t any response for a moment, but
          suddenly Diver Jack Hanson worked his way through
          the little group around the hatchway with a diver’s
          helmet over his head. Hanson didn’t speak until he
          had taken half a dozen steps down the ladder, when
          he said:

          “I guess I’m about the best friend Gus Bjorklund
          had, and if the boys will keep me supplied with air
          I’ll get those poor fellows out as quickly as any
          one could.”

          He tied a rope around Bjorklund’s shoulders,
          and while Bjorklund was being pulled up on deck
          two more ropes were thrown to Hanson. He secured
          the ropes around Menus and Fabricius, and in
          ten minutes all three men were on deck and were
          receiving first aid treatment. Ambulances were sent
          for, but it was nearly half an hour before Dr.
          Moeckel of the Harlem Hospital arrived. The three
          men were dead then. Supt. Kivlin was arrested and
          taken before Coroner Acritelli, who released him
          to appear at the inquest.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SHIPS COLLIDE IN FOG

          _Boston Transcript_

          In a fog bank that had closed in only about twenty
          minutes before, the four-masted schooner Alma E.
          A. Holmes of Philadelphia was rammed and sunk by
          the Eastern Steamship Corporation steamer Belfast,
          just outside of Graves Light, shortly after six
          o’clock this morning. That no lives were lost was
          undoubtedly due to the action of Captain Frank
          Brown of the Belfast, who held the bow of the
          steamer in the hole in the schooner’s side until
          Captain Henry A. Smith and the eight members of the
          crew had climbed aboard the Belfast. Two minutes
          after the Belfast backed away, the Holmes, which
          had been struck on the starboard side between
          the fore and mainmasts, plunged bow first to the
          bottom, her stern lifting so high out of the water
          that about twenty feet of the keel was visible to
          those on the steamer.

          The Belfast, with about 150 passengers, was on the
          way here from Bangor and Penobscot River ports. The
          weather had been thick all night, and Captain Brown
          had been constantly on duty in the pilot house.
          Shortly before the collision occurred those on the
          Belfast heard the schooner’s fog horn sounding
          at intervals. The steamer, too, was sounding her
          whistle, when out of the fog and directly ahead
          appeared the Holmes. At the first glimpse Captain
          Brown ordered the engines reversed. The distance
          between the vessels, however, was too short, and
          a moment later the sharp stem of the Belfast cut
          through the schooner’s side.

          Frightened passengers hurried out on deck as they
          felt the shock of the collision, but within a few
          minutes they were assured by members of the crew
          that they were in no danger. Many, nevertheless,
          feared that the Belfast was going to sink.
          Meantime, Captain Brown held the steamer’s bow
          where it was, as he realized that the damage was
          serious and that the schooner, laden deep as she
          was with coal, would go down quickly if the sea was
          permitted to rush in.

          Meanwhile, the skipper and crew of the schooner had
          got on deck, two or three of the sailors in scanty
          attire, as they did not have time to dress after
          being roused from their bunks. Captain Smith was
          on deck when the accident happened, and perceived
          when the steamer was sighted that the collision was
          bound to occur. He shouted for all of the crew to
          come on deck, and nearly all responded before the
          crash.

          While passengers crowded forward on the decks of
          the Belfast, a ladder was let down to the deck of
          the schooner, and one after the other the crew of
          the Holmes climbed to safety. Captain Smith had
          some difficulty in impressing some of the crew
          with the necessity of quick action, one man being
          particularly stubborn. The rescue was accomplished
          in about ten minutes, according to Captain Brown
          of the Belfast, and then the steamer backed away.
          As she withdrew from the hole in the schooner’s
          side, it was seen that the Belfast’s stem had been
          twisted over to port. Otherwise she was apparently
          undamaged, and was not leaking, according to
          Captain Brown, after she docked at India Wharf.

          The sight of the schooner going to the bottom was
          one that the passengers will remember. In Captain
          Brown’s opinion it was spectacular, in view of
          the manner in which the craft seemed to stand on
          her head, with the stern rearing almost straight
          out of the water, until she disappeared beneath
          the surface. Every one of the passengers praised
          Captain Brown highly for the manner in which he
          handled the situation and rescued the shipwrecked
          men. According to Captain Brown of the Belfast,
          the collision took place about four and one-half
          miles northeast of the dumping ground buoy outside
          of Graves Light, and the schooner sank in about
          twenty fathoms of water. Neither he nor Captain
          Smith cared to make any statement regarding
          responsibility for the accident. An investigation
          to determine this will be made by the United States
          Steamboat Inspectors.

          The Alma E. A. Holmes was bound from Norfolk to
          Salem with 1819 tons of coal. She sailed from
          Norfolk a week ago Wednesday. She was a craft of
          1208 tons gross register, 1069 net, 202 feet long,
          41 feet beam and 18 feet deep, and was built at
          Camden, Me., in 1896. Joseph Holmes, Sr., of Toms
          River, N. J., was the owner.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BOAT BATTERED IN GALE

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          ATLANTIC CITY, Nov. 20.--As gallant a fight as
          South Coast mariners have put up in many a day,
          with life as the stake, was made by the skipper
          and crew of the Drake, one of the fastest and
          smartest of the Inlet fishing fleet. Coast guards
          hardly knew her when she staggered into port this
          afternoon, battered and torn, a leaking scarecrow
          of her former trim self.

          On board Mark Broome, master, Tomkins, the mate,
          and the nine members of the crew were in much the
          same state as their vessel. All hands were half
          dead from loss of sleep and completely worn out
          after a 36-hour battle with the gale that swept the
          Atlantic yesterday.

          The Drake was making a full speed ahead plunge for
          Absecon late Thursday night, when the gale, ripping
          up the coast, struck her. There was nothing to do
          but turn and fly before the tempest, with everybody
          aboard hoping they might escape the treacherous
          shoals running miles seaward of Brigantine.

          Then, to make matters worse, the Drake’s engine
          jammed and went out of commission and Tomkins, the
          mate, almost was swept overboard by a boom, while
          he clung to the bowsprit trying to pour oil on the
          waves. Broome, the skipper, saw his mate’s peril,
          and his presence of mind saved Tomkins from going
          into the sea.

          It looked for a time last night, when the Drake
          sprung a leak, as if the staunch craft never would
          see harbor again. Everybody took turns at the
          pumps, except Broome, who stood over his flagging
          men, keeping them awake when exhaustion gripped
          them. The Drake was minus half her cargo of fish
          when she finally came in over the bar today.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FATAL SHIPWRECK

          _New York Times_

          ASTORIA, Ore., Sept. 19.--Between seventy and
          eighty men, women, and children, coastwise
          passengers and crew, were drowned late yesterday
          when the three-masted schooner Francis H. Leggett
          was pounded to pieces in a gale sixty miles from
          the mouth of the Columbia River.

          Two men were rescued by passing steamers and
          carried to Astoria and Portland. They told how
          the sea tore the vessel to pieces, and how the
          passengers were drowned, a boat load at a time, as
          the lifeboats capsized, or met their fate a little
          later when the vessel turned over.

          Alexander Farrell, a survivor, said that, at
          the height of the storm, Capt. J. Jensen of San
          Francisco, a passenger, who had lost his own ship
          six months ago and had been marooned for four
          months on an uninhabited island, went to the aid
          of Capt. Moro of the Leggett, took command of the
          passengers, and controlled them until he sank with
          the schooner.

          The schooner’s wireless, on a route alive with
          ships, raised only the Japanese cruiser Idzumo, and
          sank hours before any craft reached her position.
          The steamer Beaver, which caught the Idzumo’s
          report of the Leggett’s distress, said that the
          Idzumo gave no position for the distressed vessel.
          She asked for more details, but got no response
          from the warship.

          Plunging on her course for the Columbia River, the
          Beaver ran upon the oil tanker Buck, standing by a
          swirl of wreckage and timber which indicated where
          the Leggett had sunk. The Buck transferred Farrell
          to the Beaver for treatment. She remained for some
          time searching for bodies afloat, or for some other
          men, who, like Farrell, might have been fortunate
          enough to seize a bit of lumber and strong enough
          to cling to it for many hours in the icy water.

          The other rescued passenger, George H. Pullman
          of Winnipeg, Canada, is on board the Buck, which
          now is lying off the Columbia bar awaiting calmer
          weather before crossing in.

          It is believed that Capt. Moro of the Leggett was
          washed overboard shortly before the ship sank,
          for it was Capt. Jensen, Farrell said, who was in
          charge of a futile attempt to launch two lifeboats,
          which foundered as soon as they struck the water.

          Farrell, who had recovered considerably tonight
          from his exhaustion, said that the Leggett carried
          a full list of passengers, between forty and fifty,
          while the crew numbered about twenty-five. Among
          the passengers were six women, a girl and a boy,
          including the Captain’s wife, the mate’s wife, and
          the wife of Capt. Anderson of the schooner Carrie
          Dove.

          “We left Grey’s Harbor Wednesday morning,” said
          Farrell. “Later the sea became rough. The Leggett
          began to pound heavily and the Captain gave orders
          to jettison the deck load. Then the seas swept off
          the hatches, and the hold began to fill. Capt.
          Jensen ordered the passengers into their cabins,
          and many were still there when the boat went down.

          “When it was seen that there was no hope for
          the vessel, Capt. Jensen ordered the lifeboats
          launched. In the first boat there were thirty
          persons, two of whom were women. There were only
          six women on board, and the other four were not at
          that end of the ship when the boat was launched.

          “As soon as the boat struck the water it capsized,
          and all the occupants were thrown into the sea and
          drowned.

          “A few minutes later an attempt was made to launch
          the second lifeboat. It contained four women and
          their husbands. The boat met the same fate as the
          other boat.

          “I was standing on the bridge when the ship went
          down. The boat capsized as she sank. I don’t know
          how long I was under water, but when I came to
          the top I grabbed a railroad tie and hung on. The
          wireless operator was also hanging to the tie. I
          saw men sinking all around me, but could not hear
          their cries owing to the screeching gale.

          “It soon became dark, but it was 1 o’clock in the
          morning when the Beaver picked me up. The wireless
          operator clung to the tie with me for several
          hours, and then, benumbed by cold, he dropped off.
          No one was to blame for the wreck. The boat was
          unable to stand the storm.”

          *       *       *

          The Leggett was a three-masted schooner of 1,606
          tons gross registry and a capacity of 1,500,000
          feet of lumber. She was operated by the Charles R.
          McCormick Company of San Francisco.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The following two stories illustrate different
          arrangements of the same material and were probably
          telegraphed by different news associations._

          EXPLOSION IN MINE

          (1)

          _San Francisco Examiner_

          MARIANNA (Pa.), November 28.--Within three
          minutes after a State mine inspector and the mine
          superintendent had returned from an inspection
          of the district, the model Marianna mine of the
          Pittsburg-Buffalo Coal Company was blown up by an
          explosion to-day.

          At midnight the rescuers, penetrating through a
          portion of the shaft, came upon the bodies of 142
          men, most of whom had been killed instantaneously
          by the debris flung upon them by the explosion.
          Many of the remains were badly mangled. Eighteen
          bodies were immediately carried to the top of the
          shaft, where they were encoffined. Six others,
          killed at the top of the shaft, had been previously
          recovered. Whether any more remain in the wrecked
          mine will not be known until morning.

          When she learned that her husband was among the
          dead, Mrs. Joseph Jones broke through the guard
          of fifty State constabulary and attempted to dash
          herself to the bottom of the mine. She was caught
          and restrained just as she was about to make the
          fatal jump. Mrs. George Acker became violently
          insane when she heard that her husband was in the
          mine, and was arrested and placed under restraint.

          At 1 o’clock Peter Arnold, an American, was brought
          out of the Rachel shaft alive. Joseph Kearney, one
          of the rescuers, reported that others were living.

          The Marianna mine, which had been in operation less
          than three months, was considered the model mine of
          the world. Every device known to modern invention
          had been installed to prevent just such a tragedy
          as occurred to-day. But, wrecked by a mysterious
          explosion, the very machinery which was to have
          made accident impossible hampered the rescuers at
          their work. They did not understand the wonderful
          mechanism which bolstered the great mine with such
          a network of contrivances, and they were delayed in
          the attempt to bore through to the bodies of the
          men lying dead in the bottom of the shaft.

          The explosion came just before the noon hour in the
          Rachel shaft. It was so terrific that the blast,
          blowing up the whole length of the deep shaft, tore
          loose the giant elevator cage at the surface of the
          mine and hurled it 300 feet away.

          Two men were in the cage at the time. Both were
          instantly killed, the head of one of them being
          literally blown off.

          Immediately following the explosion, rescuers began
          frantically to burrow at the mouth of the mine in
          a futile effort to dig down through the tremendous
          masses of coal that blocked the upper reaches
          of the shaft, while other rescuers, headed by
          President John K. Jones, of the Pittsburg-Buffalo
          Coal Company, rushed to the scene in special trains
          from Pittsburg and Monongahela with the latest
          appliances, which were erected at the head of the
          shaft to bore to the entombed men.

          Five thousand women and children and miners
          thronged the mouth of the mine, the former weeping
          piteously and pleading for the rescue of their
          fathers or brothers.

          The officials of the mine are in a pitiful
          condition. They have spent hundreds of thousands of
          dollars to make the Marianna fireproof, and experts
          have assured them that such a disaster as occurred
          to-day was impossible. In the excitement and panic
          it is impossible thus far to learn the names of the
          victims. But the books of the company indicate that
          the majority of the 275 buried in the Rachel are
          Americans and that most of the others are English
          miners imported by the company two months ago to
          work the richest shafts.

          (2)

          _Chicago Record-Herald_

          PITTSBURG, Nov. 28.--Two hundred and seventy-five
          men, a majority of them Americans, are believed
          all to have perished in an explosion which wrecked
          the mine of the Pittsburg-Buffalo Coal Company at
          Marianna, Washington County, shortly before noon
          to-day. Marianna is considered the model mining
          town of the world, and the mine itself was claimed
          to be as nearly perfect in equipment as modern
          science could devise.

          Since the blast entombed all the men in the mine,
          smoke has been issuing from the shaft, showing that
          the workings are afire, and rescuers who entered
          were compelled, after progressing only a short
          distance, to retreat on account of the intense heat.

          The explosion happened at 11:30 o’clock this
          morning, when the full force was at work. The
          explosion was terrific, and if all in the mine
          were not mangled by its force, it seems certain
          that they perished in the subsequent fire or were
          suffocated by the deadly fumes.

          The force of the explosion can be imagined when it
          is known that the heavy iron cage which carried the
          men from the surface to the workings was blown 300
          feet away from the mouth of the shaft. Two men who
          were in the cage at the time were killed, the head
          of one of them being blown off.

          Three foreigners who were at the mouth of the mine
          when the explosion occurred are in the hospital in
          a critical condition from injuries received when
          the mine cage was blown out of the shaft. They also
          inhaled the poisonous fumes.

          The fanhouse was partly demolished and the fans
          stopped for over an hour.

          The explosion was in shaft No. 2. The only way to
          reach the workings is through that shaft, as shaft
          No. 1 is not completed. Some of the officials of
          the coal company believe it will be necessary to
          dig through 800 feet of solid coal before they can
          reach the workings.

          State Mine Inspector Louttit and Mine Foreman
          Kennedy had just completed a two days’ examination
          of the mine, and had come from the mine only three
          minutes before the explosion occurred.

          When the town was shaken by the blast, all the
          people rushed from their houses. Learning of the
          extent of the disaster, the members of the families
          of the doomed men rushed to the mouth of the mine,
          and a pathetic scene followed. Wives, mothers and
          relatives of the men are gathered about, and their
          cries are pitiful.

          It is said there is a large gas well in the
          vicinity of the mine. Whether the gas from this
          well was communicated to the mine and became
          ignited, or whether powder and dynamite used
          for blasting purposes exploded, cannot now be
          ascertained.

          Rushing as fast as steam could carry them, special
          trains from this city and Monongahela went to the
          scene of the disaster. On them were officials of
          the coal company and many prominent miners who
          are considered experts in the work of rescue.
          The latest appliances from the new United States
          laboratory in this city, which were recently tested
          before foreign and American experts, for the saving
          of life in mine explosions, were hurried to the
          mine.

          John H. Jones, president of the Pittsburg-Buffalo
          Coal Company, was almost a physical wreck when he
          learned of the accident. He trembled in every limb
          and could scarcely speak. Accompanied by other
          officials of the company, and by J. W. Paul of the
          United States mine testing station located here,
          President Jones went at once to the scene in a
          special train.

          Two assistants accompanied Mr. Paul, carrying
          patented helmets that make work possible in the
          most dangerous mine. With these men Mr. Paul
          expected to be able to save many lives.

          Early reports as to the number of victims of the
          disaster varied greatly. The mine officials first
          claimed that not more than 100 men could have been
          caught, but it now is certain that 275 were at work
          at the time and that none in the shaft escaped.

          State Mine Inspector Louttit and Mine Foreman
          Kennedy, who had just completed a two days’
          examination of the mine, declared that they had
          found it in perfect condition. At the present
          time, they say, it is impossible to state whether
          the explosion was caused by gas or by a powder
          explosion. Mr. Jones, president of the company,
          stated that almost the entire force of men were in
          the mine at the time of the explosion, but he did
          not know the full extent of the casualties.

          Marianna was built recently by the
          Pittsburg-Buffalo Coal Company. It necessitated a
          great outlay of money, as it was the intention to
          make the mine up to date and the living conditions
          of the miners the same as could be secured in a
          large city. The houses were of brick construction,
          and each contained a bathroom. When completed
          the town was said by foreign and American mine
          officials to be the most perfect mining town in the
          world.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ENTOMBED MINERS

          _Kansas City Times_

          JOPLIN, MO., June 18.--The occasional
          “rap-rap-rap” which has encouraged the men who
          are battling with the tons of rock and earth
          imprisoning two men in the Longacre-Chapman mine
          ceased yesterday afternoon. Daniel Hardendorf and
          Reed Taylor, the men who are buried, have now been
          in the mine since 6 o’clock last Friday night.
          There is hope yet for their rescue, but that hope
          grows weaker as the night wears on.

          The best shovelers in the Joplin district, 150 of
          them, are working quietly, feverishly, knowing that
          every minute lost means that much less chance of
          rescuing the men. They work with strained nerves,
          in squads of eight which enter the shaft, then come
          up at the end of two hours completely exhausted.

          A crowd of about five hundred persons, miners,
          friends and relatives, are at the mouth of the
          shaft. It’s a strange, pathetic crowd, alternately
          weeping and praying.

          Through this crowd tonight four big, pale men
          elbowed their way. They were William Lester, Roy
          Woodmansee, Edward Spencer and A. H. Harwood,
          miners who were taken from the shaft Tuesday night
          after having been entombed themselves four days
          in another part of the mine. They pleaded to be
          allowed to help in the rescue work.

          “Let us save them. It’s hell down there, poor
          fellows,” one said grimly.

          A tragic figure in the crowd is Mrs. Hardendorf,
          wife of one of the entombed men. As the shifts of
          men go down she stands by and pleads with them to
          exert every effort. When the men, exhausted by
          their efforts, come up to be relieved, she works
          with the other women, passing around coffee and
          food.

          Thirty-five feet of rock and earth separate the
          entombed miners from liberty. The two men have been
          without food, water or air more than eight days
          now. When the tapping ceased yesterday afternoon
          many shook their heads.

          “They are dead,” they say sadly.

          But the crowd about the shaft never diminishes and
          the shovelers never quit.

          “Maybe they have gone farther into the drift to get
          better air,” some say hopefully.

          About $1,500 has been raised by popular subscriptions
          to pay the men who are helping in the rescue work.
          The amount soon will be increased.

          Experienced miners say it will be late Saturday
          night or early Sunday morning before the tons of
          rocks and earth can be shoveled away. If the
          buried miners have fainted from lack of air, there
          is little hope of reaching them alive. But if they
          have gone back farther in the drift they can be
          saved.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FALL FROM SCAFFOLD

          _New York Times_

          Because he had refused to take a seriously injured
          man in his automobile to St. Luke’s Hospital
          yesterday afternoon, the chauffeur of a machine
          standing outside of South Field, opposite Columbia
          University Library, was set upon by a crowd of Yale
          and Columbia University students and threatened
          with bodily injury unless he did so. Thoroughly
          frightened, the chauffeur consented to take the
          injured man to the hospital, where his condition is
          said to be serious.

          The injured man was Peter Bunn, a bricklayer, of
          No. 231 East 80th street, who was working on Kent
          Hall, a new Columbia University building, at 116th
          street and Amsterdam avenue. Bunn and his brother
          John were on a scaffolding on the third floor of
          the building, overlooking South Field, the athletic
          field of the university, where Yale and Columbia
          were playing a game of baseball.

          As the crowds began to leave the field, the two
          men shouted from their high perch and imitated the
          cheers of the students. While they were jumping
          about on the platform of the scaffold, it swung far
          out from the wall, and Peter fell to the ground.

          *       *       *       *       *

          TWO BOYS DROWN

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Joseph Tordio, 19 years old, of 920 Townsend
          street, tried to save Albert Arrigo, 8 years old,
          of 457 West Superior street, from drowning in the
          north branch of the river at Superior street last
          night. Both drowned.

          Arrigo, a mere stripling, was fishing. He lost his
          balance and toppled from the pier. Screams of his
          brother, Charles, 12 years old, attracted Tordio.
          He threw off his shoes, coat, and hat and jumped
          in. For fifteen minutes the battle with death ran
          on.

          Tordio did not know the science of rescuing a
          drowning person. He might have stunned the boy
          and got back to the pier. But he merely used his
          muscle. Then the little boy, in a death grapple,
          tightened his arms around Tordio like two small
          bands of steel.

          The larger boy tired. The murky water ran over his
          face. For an instant he thought he might lose. That
          was his undoing. Fear unnerved him. He fought in a
          frenzy. They went down together, the younger boy
          strangling but still clasping his two small bands
          of steel around the rescuer’s body.

          They came up, or Tordio’s face did. With the terror
          of death on him, Tordio made a last desperate
          effort. It failed. He opened his mouth to call for
          help, but the voice was drowned with the gurgling
          water. He quit. His hands went up in a last act of
          despair. Then they went down. In a moment there was
          nothing on the water at that point save a few tiny
          waves and a few bubbles.

          The police came with grappling hooks. The body of
          little Arrigo was recovered. The doctors worked for
          an hour to drive air back into the water bloated
          lungs. It was futile.

          Tordio’s body is still on the floor of the river
          somewhere. He did not know the boy he tried to save.

          *       *       *       *       *

          INVESTIGATION OF CAUSE OF DROWNING

          _Boston Herald_

          The city authorities, the police and the district
          attorney have been asked to investigate conditions
          at the deserted wharf on Albany street at the foot
          of Union Park where one boy was drowned on Tuesday
          afternoon and another narrowly escaped drowning
          on the morning of the same day. Residents of the
          neighborhood say that in the last decade the place
          has claimed no less than seven victims and has been
          the scene of a score of accidents more or less
          serious.

          So far no one directly responsible for the
          recurring fatalities has been found. The premises
          are private property, the boys who frequent the
          place are trespassers under the law, the city
          believes that it has no right to interfere and the
          police of the district say that the only way they
          could deal with the situation would be to have an
          officer stationed on the ground day and night.

          With a frontage of some 200 feet on Albany street
          the lot extends back over a grass-grown area about
          50 feet to the South bay. At the edge of the water
          are the ruins of an old pier, a stretch of broken
          boards and a group of broken piles.

          The whole place is absolutely open to the street
          and is unguarded by fence or barrier of any kind.
          It has all the attractions of a playground and
          swimming hole and is doubly alluring to the lads of
          the neighborhood owing to the fact that they have
          been warned off from time to time by the police.

          All during the summer scores of boys of all ages,
          but chiefly between 5 and 14 years, haunt the old
          wharf, jumping from pile to pile or taking an
          occasional dip when the officer on the beat is not
          looking. From the shore the channel shelves down
          sharply to a depth of about 30 feet.

          The nature of the danger was shown Tuesday
          afternoon. Alexander Penney, the 7-year-old son
          of Alexander Penney of 114 Maiden street, while
          playing fireman with several companions among the
          piles, slipped and fell into the water. His body
          disappeared and was not found until it was picked
          up yesterday morning near the Dover street bridge
          by the crew of the policeboat Watchman.

          In the morning of the same day Arthur York, 5 years
          old, of Albany street, stumbled overboard and
          was rescued with considerable difficulty by John
          Melanphy, who was forced to dive before he could
          bring the boy to the surface.

          Similar accidents have happened in the past
          with such frequency that the citizens of the
          neighborhood are demanding that some action be
          taken to close the wharf and keep the children away
          from it. Joseph E. Ferreira of 1 Pelham street,
          a business man, well known politically in the
          section, circulated a petition asking the city
          to take action. There were over 250 signers, but
          when the petition was presented to the mayor it
          was found that the city had no legal right to act.
          Mr. Ferreira has since appealed to the district
          attorney and to the police in an attempt to have
          the wharf fenced in.

          Mayor Fitzgerald paid a personal visit to the scene
          of Tuesday’s accidents yesterday morning. He looked
          over the ground carefully and interviewed numerous
          small boys who had been attracted to the spot.
          Several of them were playing about the wharf end,
          apparently unmindful of the danger.

          “The situation here is a deplorable one,” said
          Mayor Fitzgerald, “but up to the present I have
          been unable to discover any way in which the city
          can act. The premises are privately owned, and the
          city, so far as I am informed, has no right to
          fence the place in or otherwise block it from the
          street.

          “Something should be done, however, to prevent the
          recurrence of drowning accidents. It would seem
          that much of the trouble would be obviated if the
          owners would consent to erect a high board fence.
          I believe also that the police might be a bit more
          vigilant, although I realize that the only sure way
          to keep boys off a lot like this would be to have
          an officer stationed here all the time.

          “The place as it stands is a temptation to every
          child who loves the water. In the hot weather it
          is bound to lure about every healthy boy in the
          vicinity. If funds were available, I should suggest
          that the happiest solution of the difficulty would
          be for the city to take the land over and transform
          it into a bathing park. The neighborhood is crowded
          and the nearest public bathing place is at Dover
          street.

          “The accident calls attention to the relatively
          small number of our boys that can swim. I have
          always advocated swimming instruction for our
          children, and the fatality of Tuesday only
          emphasizes the need of it.”

          Mayor Fitzgerald allowed himself to be photographed
          at the spot where the accident occurred, and as he
          did so seven urchins grouped themselves about him.
          Six of them were under 10 years and the other 13
          years old.

          “How many of you boys can swim?” asked the mayor.

          The six younger boys shook their heads and the
          oldest admitted that he could “a little.”

          “That is a fair example of conditions,” said Mayor
          Fitzgerald, “and a good argument against allowing a
          place like this to exist.”

          The property has been idle for a number of years
          and is said to have been the subject of litigation.
          The assessors’ books give the owners of the
          property as Grant and Alice Nilson, neither of whom
          is a resident of Boston.

          If the owners do not take measures to shut the old
          wharf from the street, Mr. Ferreira and a number of
          other South End residents say they will appeal to
          the courts in an effort to secure a remedy.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BOY SAVES DROWNING MAN

          _New York World_

          Johnny Donivan, fifteen years old, No. 2005 Second
          avenue, went down to the Battery yesterday to look
          for a job, and the only job he found was to save
          a man from drowning. Johnny had no objection to
          saving a drowning man, but was much disappointed at
          not finding work, for his father has been out of a
          job since last Christmas, and there are eight in
          the family.

          Daniel Wilson, who has been a deep-sea fireman,
          went to sleep on a pier and rolled off into the
          bay, striking his head on a rock. Then he floated
          seaward.

          Johnny Donivan jumped in after Wilson. With both
          hands the fireman grabbed the boy so tightly around
          the throat that he almost squeezed the breath out
          of him.

          Johnny seized the man around the waist, was pulled
          under water twice, but swam with Wilson to the
          pier, where the Liberty Island steamer makes fast.
          Policeman Joseph Murry hauled them out.

          John Brown, watchman in the Barge Office, lent
          Johnny Donivan his old shirt and trousers while the
          boy’s raiment was drying in the sunshine. Johnny
          said he had a place in a picture frame store in
          Beaver street until eight weeks ago when he was
          let out. The only one in the family working is one
          of Johnny’s sisters, and she earns $3 a week as a
          dressmaker’s apprentice. A year ago he dived into
          the East River at One Hundred and Second street and
          saved a ten-year-old boy from drowning. On that
          occasion a policeman gave him five cents so he
          wouldn’t have to walk home.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BABY DROWNS

          _Brooklyn Eagle_

          Mrs. Rose Stock left her rooms, on the second floor
          of 550 South avenue, at 10 o’clock this morning to
          step across the street to make some purchases at a
          grocery store. As she closed the door, the baby,
          Harriet, 3 months old, was sleeping quietly in its
          crib, and Louis, 5 years old, with Dorothy, 3 years
          old, her other children, were playing.

          Scarcely had the mother gone when an idea seized
          one of the two. It was probably Louis, although
          he credited Dorothy with it when asked about it.
          Why not take the baby out of its crib and give it
          a bath in the tub, as they had seen mother do so
          often? It was a brilliant thought. So Louis went
          and fetched the baby and took it to the bathroom.

          The tub was full of water and clothes, for Mrs.
          Stock had been washing there the night before, and
          had not finished soaking the clothes. They set the
          baby in the water, which was about a foot deep.
          The baby gasped, gurgled and was still. It did not
          appear to enter into the spirit of the game at all.

          Louis had never seen the baby so quiet before when
          its mother bathed it. He could not quite make out
          just what was wrong, but a vague foreboding that
          he had done something he ought not to came over
          him. He ran out into the hall and met his mother
          returning with her arms laden with groceries for
          the dinner hour.

          “Oh, mama!” he cried, “the baby is in the water.”

          Mrs. Stock ran up the stairs, but before she got
          there Mrs. Rose Leiser, a next-door neighbor, had
          lifted little Harriet out of the tub and laid her
          on the bed.

          Dr. Joseph Strong of 566 Waite avenue was called
          in and tried artificial respiration. Every time he
          moved the little arms a jet of water gushed from
          the baby’s mouth. His efforts were in vain.

          When a reporter called at the little home some time
          later, Mrs. Stock was seated in one room surrounded
          by a semicircle of sympathizing neighbors, and in
          the next room Louis, who has sunny Lord Fauntleroy
          curls and a dimpled face, was down on his knees
          looking through a photograph album. He looked up at
          the visitor with steady blue eyes and a smile when
          he was asked who put the baby in the water.

          “Dorey did,” he replied.

          “Where is the baby now?”

          “I know,” he said. “It’s on the bed. It’s sleeping.”

          Then he turned to his photograph album, but when a
          search was made for little Dorothy, he led the way
          up the stairs and showed the visitor how to open
          the door.

          Brown-haired Dorothy, with ear-rings in her ears,
          hid her face behind the skirts of a neighbor. She
          thought the man who came was going to take her away
          somewhere, and she hung her head.

          “Louis put the baby in the water,” she said. That
          was all she seemed to know about it. Louis laughed
          and went back to his album. He could not understand
          why his mother was crying so in the next room.
          Wasn’t the baby on the bed just as she had left it?

          *       *       *       *       *

          SHOOTING ACCIDENT

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Elgin, Ill., Oct. 28--[Special.]--Walter Black, 17
          year old son of August Black of 416 Carroll street,
          came home from a hunting trip at 7 o’clock tonight
          and stood his single barrel shotgun up in a corner
          of the kitchen.

          “Big bruvver’s a sojer,” lisped Harold Black, 5
          years old.

          “Naw, there ain’t any war in Elgin,” replied
          August, aged 11.

          Walter went upstairs to change his clothing. Harold
          went to the corner and attempted to drag the heavy
          gun along.

          “Le’s play sojers,” he said.

          “You ain’t big enough to carry the gun,” retorted
          August. “Let me take it.”

          August took the gun, swung it across his shoulder,
          and marched around the kitchen shouting “Hep! Hep!”
          with Harold composing the rear guard of the army.

          “Now we’re at the war,” sang out August. He turned
          suddenly and pointed the weapon at Harold, his
          finger on the trigger. There was a roar and a spit
          of flame. The muzzle was only a few inches from
          the head of the younger boy. He fell dead with the
          whole charge in his head.

          Mrs. Black ran to the kitchen and fainted when she
          saw what had happened. An inquest will be held
          tomorrow morning at 9 o’clock.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The following three stories
          published in Milwaukee evening papers should be
          compared as different versions of the same incident
          in a suburb._

          SEARCH FOR LOST CHILD

          (1)

          _Milwaukee Evening Wisconsin_

          WEST ALLIS, Oct. 21.--After 2000 residents of West
          Allis had spent an entire night searching for
          Walter, the 18-months’-old son of Mr. and Mrs.
          Ernest Strong, 5402 Fargo avenue, the little fellow
          was found sleeping in a coal bin in the basement of
          the home of Mrs. Johanna Bitter, Fifty-fourth and
          Fargo avenues.

          The little lad had wandered away from his father’s
          yard on Friday afternoon and reached the yard of
          Mrs. Bitter. While at play near a basement window
          he probably tumbled through to the coal below.

          There he slept soundly until early this morning,
          when he was found by Mrs. Bitter when she went to
          the basement to clean out the bin. She picked the
          child up and carried him in her arms to the home
          of the distracted mother, who had been waiting and
          watching all through the night for the return of
          her baby.

          With a cry of joy she seized him and clasped him to
          her breast and imprinted kiss after kiss upon his
          face. The father, who, with a party of neighbors,
          had been searching every corner of the village, was
          notified and hurried to his home to see his boy.

          Walter was playing on Friday afternoon with his
          brother Willie in the back yard of the home.
          About 3 o’clock Willie went into the house, and
          his mother asked where Walter was. The brother
          told her that he was playing in the yard. She was
          entertaining visitors and forgot about the lad
          until after 4 o’clock.

          When she went into the yard, the boy was not there.
          She searched through the neighborhood for a time
          and then notified her husband, who works at the
          Allis-Chalmers plant. He organized a searching
          party and spent the entire night with almost 2000
          others in trying to locate the baby.

          At first it was feared that the child had been
          kidnaped, as a man with a young child was seen
          driving down Fargo avenue shortly after the Strong
          child was missed by the mother.

          (2)

          _Milwaukee News_

          He was such a little chap--only 18 months
          old--and when he started out yesterday to take
          his pedestrian exercises, in which he had not
          progressed very far, he met with a mishap in
          tumbling through the basement window of a
          neighbor’s house into the coal bin.

          His parents, Mr. and Mrs. Ernest Strong,
          Fiftyfourth and Fargo avenues, called him Bootsie.
          When Bootsie found himself in a pile of coal, it
          tickled his childish fancy to learn what beautiful
          black marks the coal made on his hands.

          He tired of playing with the coal, rolled over
          and went sound asleep. Then the trouble started.
          An older brother who had been left in the yard to
          watch the baby, came into the house alone.

          “Where’s Bootsie?” the mother asked.

          The little fellow shook his head and said he didn’t
          know. The mother ran to the yard. No Bootsie was
          in sight. Inquiries were made among the neighbors.
          Then the news of the mysterious disappearance of
          Bootsie traveled from mouth to mouth until West
          Allis became aroused.

          Deputy sheriffs got busy; the West Allis police
          force was brought out; neighbors, relatives and
          friends to the number of almost 1,000 gathered near
          the home.

          The father came home to supper, learned of his
          son’s disappearance and was puzzled. Mrs. Strong
          wept and at times was on the verge of hysteria.
          Women called and tried to comfort her.

          Then a searching party of many hundred started over
          the territory, “with a fine tooth comb,” the police
          said, to look for Bootsie.

          Ponds in the neighborhood were dragged, and until
          far into the night, lanterns could be seen bobbing
          over the fields, going here, there, everywhere,
          searching for Bootsie Walter Strong, youngest son
          of Mr. and Mrs. Ernest Strong.

          Then someone brought in a clew. An evil-looking man
          with a black mustache and smoking a cigarette was
          seen driving through West Allis about 6 o’clock in
          the evening. He had a child on his knees.

          The child answered the description of Bootsie. He
          was crying and struggling to get away. The black
          mustached man leered at people in driving by and
          disappeared.

          The child had been kidnaped! There was no
          use denying it. Had not the clew been almost
          conclusive? By midnight the search for Bootsie
          had been abandoned. Searchers returned home
          disheartened.

          About 5 o’clock this morning Mrs. Johanna Bitter,
          who lives at 5418 Fargo avenue on property
          adjoining the Strong home, went to the basement to
          get some potatoes.

          There on top of the coal pile was Bootsie--he of
          the mysterious disappearance--sound asleep, with
          his mouth open. The child was carried home by
          Mrs. Bitter, and when the crowd of last night’s
          searchers called at the Strong home again this
          morning, it was met by the wide-eyed Bootsie,
          munching on a cookie, with evidence of coal dust
          still lingering in his golden hair.

          (3)

          _Milwaukee Journal_

          If Walter Strong, 18 months, 5402 Fargo-av, West
          Allis, were to try and make up during the next
          four years the sleep that he caused to be lost
          Friday night, he would fail. It would be impossible
          because 2,000 nights o’ sleep went a-glimmering in
          the twelve hours of darkness.

          But that doesn’t worry Walter Strong, 18 months.
          Not at all. That sleep didn’t belong to him, but
          was the property of 2,000 neighbors.

          Friday afternoon, when the baby’s father, Ernest
          Strong, was at work in the Allis-Chalmers plant and
          his mother, Mrs. Anna Strong, was busy with her
          household duties, young Walter toddled out into the
          yard in front of his home. That yard, the street
          beyond and the highways and byways that Walter
          could indistinctly see stretching out before him,
          were to him as were the unexplored new worlds to
          Columbus.

          It was 3 p. m. when Walter began his journey. At 6
          p. m. he had not returned. Strong had come home;
          the mother had noticed that her baby was missing,
          and a search was begun. At 9 p. m. Walter was still
          missing. An alarm was spread in the neighborhood.

          Then the search began. The good neighbors of West
          Allis scurried to and fro, listening to stories
          of kidnaping, following various clews, telling
          of strange men seen in the neighborhood and,
          altogether, creating intense excitement. This
          lasted until 6 a. m. Saturday.

          What Baby Walter thought as he toddled out of his
          yard cannot be told, for Walter is unable to
          say. He walked up Fargo-av until he observed a
          peculiar--to him--scene. To most of us it would
          have been an ordinary cottage at 5418 Fargo-av, the
          home of Mrs. Johanna Bitter, but to Walter there
          was a great cavern underneath a pile of wood. This
          cavern had a screen across the mouth, and, peering
          through, Walter could see a pile of dark stuff. To
          others that would have been a cellar filled with
          coal.

          Walter was highly interested in his discovery and
          began to pry at the screen. Ah! the screen moved!
          It opened! Walter pushed his head inside and gazed
          about. Then he tumbled in.

          Perhaps he cried a little when he fell, but if he
          did no one heard him. He soon reconciled himself to
          his imprisonment and began playing with objects
          at hand. Soon, however, he became sleepy and what
          makes a better bed than a large pile of potato
          sacks?

          So while his frantic parents and the neighbors were
          searching for him, Baby Walter slept peacefully
          within a few hundred feet of home and mother.

          Early Saturday Mrs. Bitter, who lives alone,
          entered her cellar to get some potatoes for
          breakfast. She carried no light, and when she
          neared the bin, stumbled over the sacks. The baby
          cried out. That ended his trip.

          When Baby Walter sat on his father’s knee Saturday
          morning calmly munching a biscuit, he blinked and
          smiled. The father and mother were busy thanking
          the neighbors for their interest and assistance.




CHAPTER IV

POLICE NEWS AND CRIME


=Type of story.= Since police news ranges from slight misdemeanors to
the most serious of crimes such as murder and suicide, it offers widely
different material for news stories. Because of the general interest in
the material with which stories of crime deal, the purely informative
story is sufficient in itself to insure reading (cf. “Burglary,”
p. 54, and “Murder of Business Man,” p. 59). The strong personal
element in stories of wrong-doing gives occasion for effective human
interest presentation in the informative story (cf. “Forgery,” p. 49,
and “Street Car Bandit,” p. 57). Amusing aspects of minor offenses,
and even of burglary, hold-ups, or fraud, often furnish inspiration
for humorous treatment (cf. “Charged with Intoxication,” p. 48, and
“Hold-up,” p. 57).

=Purpose.= In no other kind of news should the effect of the story on
the reader receive more careful consideration than in news of crime.
The evil effects of news stories of criminal acts on many readers have
already been pointed out (cf. p. 8). That these destructive influences
can be offset to a considerable extent by constructive handling of
news has also been shown. In order that the crime story may have a
deterrent effect, the crime must be shown to be wrong, even though the
wrong-doer deserves some sympathy. The results of wrong-doing, not
only in the form of legal punishment imposed but in the remorse and
the pangs of guilty conscience that the wrong-doer suffers, as well as
in the disgrace that he brings to others through his criminal acts,
when emphasized in news stories tend to deter others from risking the
dangers of such penalties.

Constructive presentation of crime news may also include emphasis on
underlying causes and responsibility, especially when these can be
traced to bad conditions in the community or in society as a whole,
since such emphasis leads readers to consider the necessity for
changing the conditions that are directly or indirectly responsible
for the criminal acts. In so far as the criminal is the victim of
these circumstances it may be legitimate to create a sympathetic
understanding of his act (cf. “Hold-up,” p. 56, and “Story of Escaped
Convict,” p. 68).

A danger in writing stories of crime lies in creating sympathy for
the undeserving wrong-doer by a sentimental treatment of him and his
act. By making more or less of a hero of him, news stories may lead
undiscriminating readers to regard him and his crime as not unworthy
of emulation. There is also a temptation in writing crime stories to
sacrifice truth and accuracy of detail in order to secure greater
picturesqueness or stronger dramatic situations, but such treatment is
an indefensible deviation from the fundamental duty of presenting the
news fairly and accurately.

Whatever influence a story of crime may have on the reader should be
the result of the reporter’s selection and presentation of the actual
facts. Moralizing or “editorializing” concerning the facts is not only
unnecessary but undesirable in news stories.

=Treatment.= Dramatic narrative and vivid description, when true
to the facts of the news, are both legitimate and commendable. It is
important to keep consistently to one point of view in arranging and
presenting the details, particularly in constructive stories. Available
material for making the narration and the description effective
includes confessions, interviews with witnesses and persons involved,
and clues to the identity of the perpetrator or to the solution of any
mysterious phases of the crime. Fairness requires that persons accused
of wrong-doing as well as their accusers be given a hearing in news
stories. It must also be remembered that a person accused of crime is
not a criminal unless he has been convicted; until he has been found
guilty, he is described as an “alleged” criminal, or is said to be
“charged” with the crime.

=Contents.= In police news and crime stories details of
significance are: (1) number of lives destroyed or endangered; (2)
names of victims; (3) names of persons charged with the crime; (4)
arrests of suspects and detention of witnesses; (5) clues to the
identity of the perpetrators when these are not known; (6) causes,
motives, and responsibility, known or conjectured; (7) amount and
character of loss; (8) methods employed in commission of the crime; (9)
measures to prevent similar crimes.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BOY RUNS AWAY

          _Chicago Herald_

          Somewhere between Chicago and Lansing, Mich.,
          Harvey L. New, a fair-haired boy of 14, is
          wandering along the dusty roads carrying a
          nightcap, a pocket full of feed and Sarah Jane, a
          stub-toed chicken.

          In his boyish heart he carries a love for his
          chicken, the life of which he felt bound to save at
          the cost of his home.

          Harvey visits his grandfather’s farm near Lansing
          every summer. A year ago his grandmother presented
          him with Sarah Jane, then only three weeks old.

          He brought the chicken to his home at 4969 Prairie
          avenue and built a coop in the back yard. Every
          morning he arose early and fed and fondled the
          chicken. When he returned from school his first
          thought was for Sarah Jane.

          One night last winter the cold penetrated the
          cellar where he kept her and froze off her toes. He
          nursed her until she got well.

          As time went on his love for the chicken grew. The
          chicken also grew, until one day Harvey’s parents
          jokingly remarked that she was getting large enough
          for a stew.

          Harvey shuddered, but said nothing. Last Sunday his
          parents again threatened to sacrifice his pet.

          Early Monday morning, when Harvey’s father entered
          the boy’s room, he found his son gone. In the mud
          beneath the bedroom window he saw footprints. He
          made a search about the house.

          Then he noticed that Sarah Jane also was gone,
          likewise a coop that Harvey had made from an old
          fruit crate. The boy’s nightcap, presented to him
          by his grandmother, also was missing. Harvey has
          not been heard from since.

          “I believe the boy actually thought I was going
          to kill his beloved pet,” said his broken-hearted
          father, James New, yesterday. “He probably will try
          to make his way to the home of his grandparents
          in Michigan. He loved his grandmother more than
          anybody else in the world, with the possible
          exception of Sarah Jane.”

          When Harvey left he wore a gray suit, a brown
          overcoat and a blue cap. He stammers slightly when
          excited.

          Harvey’s father has promised that Sarah Jane never
          will be made into stew.

          *       *       *       *       *

          “ASLEEP AT THE SWITCH”

          _New York Times_

          Frank H. Thompson of 981 West Fifty-second Street,
          who runs an elevator on ordinary days, took a day
          off yesterday and celebrated so heartily that, when
          he tried to buy a ticket to the Crescent Theatre, a
          moving picture and vaudeville house at 1,175 Boston
          Road, the Bronx, at 6:30 o’clock last evening,
          they refused to admit him. Thompson then strolled
          down an alley leading to the stage entrance, and
          finding no one at the door, stepped inside, leaned
          heavily against the wall, and went to sleep.

          Inside the theatre, where 600 persons were gathered
          to watch the election returns, which were flashed
          on the screen between acts, there was great
          excitement, for all the lights went out, even those
          of the electric sign outside the place. Thompson
          had leaned against the master switch.

          They found him there, turned the lights up again
          and turned him over to Policeman Fitzgerald, who
          locked him up in the Morrisania Station.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHARGED WITH INTOXICATION

          _New York World_

          Business has been bad with Isaac Einstein, who
          keeps a “gents’” clothing and furnishing emporium,
          No. 918 Paris avenue, the Bronx.

          To encourage trade he marked down his goods until
          it was a shame to take them at the prices he asked.
          The gilded youth of the Bronx could buy of Einstein
          a suit of evening clothes “like King Edward wears,
          $2.98: reduced from $29.80.” Still, nobody would
          buy the suit.

          The lack of customers made Einstein despondent. It
          is suspected that yesterday he sought to drown his
          low spirits in others. After a rather long absence
          he returned to his store and began to act as if the
          thought had struck him, “If I can’t sell ’em I can
          give ’em away.”

          Einstein pulled in the first man that came along
          and made him a present of a pair of trousers.

          “They cost me $4 wholesale,” said Einstein,
          tearfully. “I can’t sell ’em for $1.50. You’ve got
          fine legs; you will show off this check well. Take
          ’em, my friend, take ’em. But take my advice, too.
          You are a married man? Yes. You have children? Yes.
          Don’t wear ’em in the house when the babies are
          asleep.”

          To the next man Einstein gave “a real Panama straw
          hat” knocked down from $19 to 90 cents; to the
          third a suit of near-silk underwear such as “the
          Sultan wears when he goes visiting.”

          In a very short time 500 men and boys were
          scuffling to get into the store. Patrolman Buck
          could not restrain the mob, and sent for the
          reserves of the Alexander avenue police station.

          “At last I have a bargain crowd,” cried Einstein.
          “See what a rush.”

          Einstein thoughtlessly left his store. Policeman
          Buck grabbed him, charged him with intoxication and
          locked him up. Then Buck locked up the store.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SWINDLE

          _New York Tribune_

          Frederick A. White, fifty-six years old, who says
          he is a broker and lives at No. 345 West 116th
          street, was arrested yesterday by Detectives
          Fitzsimmons and Flood, of the District Attorney’s
          office, charged with swindling James H. Burns, of
          Knoxville, Tenn., out of lumber land in Marion, N.
          C., worth $65,000.

          Burns says that through fraud and misrepresentation
          White obtained possession of the deeds to the
          property on May 10. Burns became suspicious, and,
          coming to this city, went to Police Headquarters,
          where, according to the police, he picked out
          White’s picture, No. 4,391, in the Rogues’ Gallery.
          He then communicated with the District Attorney’s
          office, and the alleged swindler was arrested in
          the office of W. E. Wells & Co., lumber dealers, at
          No. 29 Broadway.

          Burns, who is staying at the Hoffman House, is the
          owner of extensive lumber lands in South Carolina.
          He came to this city in January, and advertised
          in an organ of the lumber trade that he had some
          property for sale. He says White, representing
          himself as a broker, called on him in answer to
          the advertisement, and said he had a prospective
          purchaser of the land. He introduced Burns to
          Frederick A. Cannon, who lives in The Bronx, as
          the ostensible purchaser. The negotiations which
          followed were completed in Washington.

          Burns was to receive two bonds for $25,000 each and
          three notes for $5,000 each, he says. The bonds, he
          understood, were guaranteed by a trust company of
          this city. The notes were for three, five and seven
          months.

          Shortly after the transfer of the property to
          Cannon it passed into the hands of the Standard
          Lumber Company, of which White is president and
          Cannon is vice-president. Burns says he tried to
          get possession of the $25,000 bonds but failed,
          notwithstanding repeated demands.

          When the first note fell due, on August 20, Burns
          did not receive the $5,000. Then the man from
          Tennessee grew suspicious, and on investigation
          he learned that the bonds were not guaranteed. He
          learned also, he says, that the Standard Lumber
          Company consisted of three shares valued at $5 each.

          The title to the land subsequently changed hands
          again, this time to the Southern Lumber Company.

          White was arrested, the police say, about five
          years ago, under the name of Wilce.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FORGERY

          _Kansas City Star_

          Sister sick. No work. Money gone. Everything that
          could be pawned or sold outright gone. Then Laura
          Walsington, 20 years old, 14 West Thirty-second
          Street, took to forgery.

          That was in July. Since then she has cashed forged
          checks for sums from $15 to $75. She was arrested
          this morning, was taken to police headquarters and
          there confessed.

          Slumped down in a chair in the office of Larry
          Ghent, chief of detectives, she wept bitterly.

          “Sister and I were living together,” she said.
          “Then she got sick. She had to go to a hospital and
          be operated on. We had a little money, but that
          soon went. Then I pawned everything I had, and then
          everything Sis had. Then those things were gone.
          Then I lost my position. I was desperate.”

          After that, she said, she decided on forgery.

          On receipts for supplies of butter and eggs,
          she had the name of a dairyman of Parkton, Kas.
          After practicing the name until proficiency had
          been acquired, she telephoned to a Lakeview bank
          to inquire if the dairyman’s checks were good.
          Informed they were, she began, July 23, to cash
          checks, signed in his name. The Eagle Clothing
          Company, the Smith Garment Company and the Wilson
          Coal & Coke Company all cashed checks for her
          aggregating $119.

          The name of the physician who had attended her
          sister was next. After practice, Miss Walsington
          issued checks signed in his name for sums totalling
          $170. The checks were cashed at the London Cloak
          Company, Peck’s, French Cloak and Suit Company and
          the Mond Suit Company.

          Then, November 10, Miss Walsington, in a downtown
          bank, found a deposit slip signed in a woman’s
          name. After practicing the signature, she
          telephoned the bank, inquiring if checks by that
          name would be honored. She drew and cashed checks
          on the woman for a total of $45.

          Miss Walsington was arrested at the Wilson Coal
          and Coke Company this morning. She was recognized
          as having previously cashed bad checks there and
          detained until the arrival of two detectives.

          “I’ll pay it all back,” she cried in Chief Ghent’s
          office. “Only give me another chance. Why, I’ve
          been respectable all my life until this happened.”

          She is being held.

          *       *       *       *       *

          WORTHLESS CHECKS

          _Topeka Capital_

          Frank Green and Ruth Blair were childhood
          sweethearts at New Rapids, Kansas. Five years ago,
          when both were 16 years old, Ruth married a man
          named Bird, 13 years her senior. The bride moved
          away while Frank remained in high school and tried
          to forget.

          Frank developed into a youthful speaker. A year
          ago last September on Labor day, Green, then 20
          years old, delivered the labor oration before
          1,500 persons at New Rapids. Then he went to Baker
          university. Young Green played in several games
          with the Baker football team and was active in the
          debating societies. He returned to his home in June
          to find his former sweetheart back in New Rapids.
          Her life with Bird had been unhappy and she had
          secured a divorce.

          The old friendship was renewed. In a few weeks the
          two were married in Atchison, “on the sly,” as
          Green said, because his parents did not approve of
          the match. With a few hundred dollars the happy
          couple left New Rapids to make their way. First
          Green tried getting subscriptions for magazines.
          This failing, other propositions were tried in
          various towns, including St. Joseph and Kansas
          City. The store of dollars dwindled until, when Mr.
          and Mrs. Green reached Topeka from Lawrence, where
          they had looked vainly for work, only $3 remained.
          That was a week ago Saturday.

          Still optimistic, Green took his wife to the Fifth
          Avenue hotel, confident that he could find work and
          meet expenses. But work was lacking, Green says.
          Meanwhile Frank Long, manager of the Fifth Avenue
          hotel, suggested several times to Green that his
          bill had not been paid.

          Completely discouraged Thursday, Green cashed
          several small checks not good. That night two suit
          cases were lowered by a rope to the street from the
          room occupied by the Greens. Then the young husband
          led his wife through the hotel lobby “to find a
          dentist to help her toothache,” as he explained
          to the night clerk. The two went to the Santa Fé
          station and boarded train No. 117, Oklahoma City
          bound.

          A telegram from Sheriff L. L. Kiene arrived ahead
          of Mr. and Mrs. Green. When they entered the
          Oklahoma City station they were arrested.

          “We were taken to the city jail like murderers,”
          said Green.

          Saturday Sheriff Kiene arrived. The return trip was
          ended last night, when Mr. and Mrs. Green slept in
          the county jail.

          Penitent would hardly describe the feeling of the
          two as expressed to big-hearted Sheriff Kiene.
          Pretty Mrs. Green was nearly a nervous wreck
          from the continued uncertainty and the shocks.
          Apparently it is the first affair with the law for
          either.

          “My record has been clear,” said Green. “I never
          have been arrested before. One hallowe’en night
          they almost got me, but I outran the cop.”

          How the present escapade will end, is not known.
          Last night Green prayed for another chance for his
          wife and himself.

          “I will make good,” he said.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_How, with additional information,
          a striking follow-up story can be written a few
          hours after the first story was published is well
          illustrated by the following two stories, the first
          of which appeared in the Saturday evening edition
          and the second in the Sunday morning edition of the
          same paper._

          EMBEZZLEMENT

          (1)

          _Kansas City Star, Saturday evening edition_

          John E. Jones, jr., formerly a clerk at the
          Merchants Bank, which day before yesterday was
          absorbed by the Commercial Trust Company, is being
          detained at police headquarters this afternoon
          pending an investigation of his accounts. He is
          about 22 years old and is married. It was asserted
          there was a discrepancy amounting to something like
          $9,000.

          The difference was found when an audit of the books
          of the Merchants Bank was made in turning over its
          money, books and business to the Commercial Trust
          Company.

          In a statement made to the police this afternoon
          young Jones told a queer story. He admitted
          falsifying the books for an amount he calculated
          to be about $9,800. But he said that he received
          only about $500 of that amount, the rest going to
          a lawyer friend. The lawyer is being detained and
          questioned this afternoon in the office of Larry
          Ghent, chief of detectives. There is some doubt as
          to whether the lawyer would be criminally liable
          although he got most of the money.

          Jones lives at 4510 Walker St. He did not dissipate
          or spend recklessly and it is believed he can
          restore the greater part of the money.

          This was the method of the bookkeeper and his
          lawyer friend. The friend wrote checks on an
          account he had in the Merchants Bank. When the
          canceled checks appeared at the Merchants Bank
          from the clearing house to be charged against the
          lawyer’s account, they first went to Jones, whose
          task at the bank gave him that opportunity. He held
          out those checks and destroyed them. He covered the
          discrepancy by making a false entry on his books.

          Jones says he received $160 at one time with which
          he purchased a motor cycle, but the rest of his
          share went to him, he says, in comparatively small
          amounts.

          Young Jones told the police that he had been forced
          by the lawyer to keep up the system of destroying
          checks and falsifying the books after once he
          started, for fear of being exposed. The bookkeeper
          said that he first fell into the clutches of
          the lawyer when the attorney representing an
          installment furniture house, threatened to take
          back the furniture he had partly paid for. A
          payment was due on it and the bookkeeper could not
          meet it. He says the lawyer proposed the scheme for
          destroying the checks and falsifying the accounts.
          Once he started, Jones said, his master made him
          keep it up. The amounts of the checks at first were
          comparatively small, but they kept getting larger
          until one day the lawyer compelled him to put over
          a check for $2,000.

          At 3:30 o’clock this afternoon the police were
          still investigating the lawyer. He cashed the
          checks, but was in no way connected with the bank.

          (2)

          _Kansas City Star, Sunday morning edition_

          After drifting in a current that both knew must
          lead to wrack and ruin, two Kansas City men are
          on the rocks today. One is Henry A. Black, 47,
          smart lawyer and man of affairs. His companion in
          dishonor is John E. Jones, jr., 21, a pallid bank
          bookkeeper.

          Accompanied by detectives and lawyers, Black went
          to his offices in the Commercial Building yesterday
          afternoon and produced from his safe cancelled
          checks totalling $9,800. The checks, drawn on his
          account at the Merchants Bank, had been paid by the
          bank but never charged against him. Jones, the tool
          in this game of foolish finance, pocketed them as
          they came in.

          Around Black were men in whose class the lawyer
          had only recently counted himself. They were all
          staring at him. He felt the need of explanation. He
          spoke slowly:

          “I was under a great financial strain and I had to
          resort to methods of raising money that otherwise I
          never would have used.”

          He said nothing more and the little group
          returned to police headquarters. Black and the
          young bookkeeper, who for months had juggled the
          lawyer-promoter’s account at the bank, were held in
          jail over night. Tomorrow both will be charged with
          a felony, the prosecutor said last night.

          Black is a church member and was for many years a
          Sunday school teacher. He is a cold man and even
          his close friends have known only in a general way
          about his business affairs. He was an exceptional
          scholar. In the last ten years he has not practiced
          much at the law, but has sought to promote
          telephone corporations and large land businesses.
          He has a lot of that force that is sometimes called
          character but more often described as personality.
          He was the first man possessed of any considerable
          personal magnetism who ever came into the life of
          John Jones, bank clerk.

          The man of affairs began to notice Jones months
          ago and Jones glowed under the attention. Married
          at 18 to a girl a year his junior, earning for a
          time $35 a month, while his wife added to this by
          wages from a wholesale coffee house, Jones had had
          a dull life. He had been graduated from a grade
          school at 14 and gone through a business college.
          Several jobs followed and he finally worked in
          one bank until his salary was raised to $50 a
          month. After that he helped his father in a grocery
          and then went to work for the Merchants Bank for
          $70 a month. When that bank was absorbed by the
          Commercial Trust Company last week, he was getting
          $75.

          This was the young bookkeeper, pallid, unassuming,
          rather thin chested, beside whose place at the bank
          railing Black, one of the bank’s customers, stopped
          one morning.

          Black asked how his checks totaled. The bookkeeper,
          returning in a moment, told him his account would
          be overdrawn $110. Black thanked him, said he would
          go out and get the money, and passed a 10-cent
          cigar over the railing.

          Many times this happened, Jones said yesterday. His
          pocket was quite used to the “feel” of one or two
          good cigars by now.

          Then one day Jones, the bank clerk, needed a
          friend. He had lost a little home out on Walker
          Avenue which he had sought to buy on installments.
          Now an installment house was threatening him for
          furniture purchased.

          Well, he guessed he had a friend, a lawyer-friend,
          too. His intimacy with the man, whom he considered
          one of the bank’s best customers, had grown. Black
          now was trusting the bookkeeper to notify him
          whenever that exasperating account was about to be
          overdrawn.

          Jones was not disappointed. The installment people
          were placated. In one interview his friend of the
          10-cent cigars arranged a basis of settlement and
          even advanced the first payment of $7.50.

          This was the story that Jones told yesterday to
          a roomful of lawyers, bankers and bond company
          representatives, and to one woman--the little girl
          who had married him at 17.

          In the next chapter it was his benefactor who
          needed a favor.

          It was in the power of the bank bookkeeper, the
          financial weakling, to favor the man of affairs.
          Black had written more checks than he could meet.
          He wanted a check for $100 held out for a day. It
          would be easy for the bookkeeper to slip it from
          the pile that came in from the clearing house. Of
          course, the man of affairs might ask Mr. White, the
          cashier. But sometimes Mr. White was willing to
          favor and sometimes not. It depended a good deal on
          how he felt. And this was important.

          That $100 check was not made good the next day. It
          went over to the “next day.”

          Others, at the insistence of the man of affairs,
          were added to this.

          The picture Jones drew in the minds of those that
          heard him was of a nervous young man, hurrying from
          the bank to the office of the man of affairs and
          greeting him with all the apprehension that had
          grown upon him every time he looked at a bank book.

          “For God’s sake get this money and get this
          straightened up.”

          “Now, that’s all right. I’ll look after this.”

          And after a few minutes Jones would be surprised
          to find himself picking up some of the other’s
          confidence. He would go back to his post confident
          that the money would soon be raised and his
          duplicity toward his employers wiped away.

          Jones would get such messages as these:

          “Meet me at 7:30 in the morning.”

          “Drop in at 6 o’clock at night.”

          “93, 94, 95, 96 are coming in. Take care of them.”

          It had reached $9,800 when the prospective
          consolidation threatened disclosure.

          Jones had the advice of the man of affairs--to keep
          quiet and trust in him as his lawyer.

          When arrest came Friday, Jones called for his
          lawyer. The lawyer was at church. The messenger
          reached the church too late.

          At midnight Black was at police headquarters. The
          police would not let him see his young client. At 8
          o’clock yesterday morning, and again at 10 o’clock,
          Black was back at the jail. But Jones, under the
          sweating of the detectives, was keeping his faith.

          Then his young wife, leaving their 2-year-old baby
          at home, came into the room. She pleaded for the
          truth. Then Jones took her hand and told the queer,
          pitiful story.

          The chief of detectives stared hard.

          “Can you tell that story before Black?” the chief
          demanded.

          In a little while Black was brought into the room.

          The two men, so radically different in character,
          education and manner, sat on either side of a desk.

          Again the young man told his story. Black played
          with a lead pencil.

          “Well, sir, what do you think of that?” the
          detective chief asked sharply.

          The answer was ready enough.

          “The boy is having a wild dream. It is
          preposterous!”

          But a little while afterwards Black said, briefly,
          that the cancelled checks, given him by the accused
          clerk, were in his office safe.

          There the checks were found. And Black, who had
          gone to the bank officials the day before and
          pleaded for time for his client’s sake, now
          pleaded for time for himself, time in which to
          clean everything up, time to make that restitution
          delayed so many months.

          In the matron’s room at the jail were the boy and
          his wife. They had been crying.

          “A headache I’ve had for weeks is gone,” the boy
          said.

          He was not vindictive.

          “I was the fool,” he said. “I thought that he was
          prosperous and that it would all come out right.”

          The disclosures of the day brought to police
          headquarters another wife, Mrs. Black, from the
          home at 215 Wilson Place. With her was the Rev.
          A. Brittingham Brown, Mr. Black’s pastor. Black’s
          7-year-old daughter was at home, asleep and
          ignorant of the day’s cumulative events.

          Mrs. Black brought for her husband in a valise a
          change of clothing.

          Black was summoned from the cell-room and conducted
          to the office of the night captain. He came in, his
          hat pulled forward, head bowed.

          Then he saw his wife. They advanced to each other
          with open arms. They kissed and hugged. Neither
          said a word for a long time.

          They all sat down, the wife holding her husband’s
          hand.

          “We are very sorry, indeed, at this sudden
          trouble,” the minister said. “The sympathy of
          pastor and of members is with you and we are going
          to stand by you. This is a time to stand by a man.”

          Black and Mrs. Black wept.

          Other friends entered the room. No one spoke of the
          case and Black volunteered no information.

          After his friends had gone, Black went back to the
          cellroom, leaving on the captain’s desk the valise
          brought by his wife. The pajamas inside would have
          given slight comfort on the iron slats upon which
          he was to sleep.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BURGLARY

          _San Francisco Chronicle_

          Diamonds and other stones to the value of $3500
          were stolen yesterday afternoon from the apartments
          of Mrs. Dennis M. Patrick at 1907 Woolworth street
          by a burglar, who ran away in such haste that he
          left jewelry to an equal value spread out on the
          bed, besides money and other valuables.

          The burglar seems to have been familiar with the
          hiding places of Mrs. Patrick’s valuables and with
          her movements as well. While she was out of the
          house between 2 and 4 o’clock in the afternoon,
          he entered the rear door with a key which he took
          from the place where she had hidden it, picked up
          a screwdriver in the kitchen, and, going straight
          to the bedroom, pried open the locked bureau drawer
          where the jewels were.

          The burglar spread the loot out on the bed and was
          evidently engaged in sorting and packing it up when
          Mrs. Patrick’s daughter, Dorothy, came home from
          school at 3:30 o’clock. The little girl went up to
          the back door, and, finding it locked, went back to
          the street and down to the corner. Apparently, when
          the child tried the back door the burglar ran out
          through the front way, as Mrs. Patrick found that
          door open when she came home half an hour later.

          The stolen jewels included thirty-seven diamonds,
          eight emeralds and eight pearls, all set in
          platinum, principally in the shape of rings and a
          lavalliere. Most of the stones were heirlooms and
          prized by Mrs. Patrick beyond their value. The
          jewels which the burglar left behind in his hurry
          included a diamond bracelet, besides other diamonds
          and emeralds, and a quantity of gold jewelry.
          Several hundred dollars’ worth of silverware and
          about $20 in coin had not been touched. But the
          burglar did take about 55 cents from the little
          girl’s purse.

          A cigarette on the floor, a room full of smoke and
          an excellent set of finger prints on a hand mirror,
          which Detective M. T. Arey found last night, were
          all the clews the burglar left.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BURGLARY

          _Chicago Herald_

          Helen Walker is 12 years old. Her father is John
          Walker, a lawyer, and the family resides in Oakland
          Park. Mr. Walker always has been proud of his
          daughter. But he boasts about her now.

          Helen’s mother, when she kissed her girl good-by
          yesterday morning, had said she would not be home
          till late. That’s why Helen grew suspicious.

          She heard some one walking upstairs when she came
          home from school. It couldn’t be her father.
          And the step was too heavy for her mother; and,
          besides, her mother wasn’t home.

          So she tiptoed upstairs and into her father’s room,
          and she found a big revolver in a bureau drawer.
          Then she walked quietly into the room where the
          noise seemed to come from.

          She saw a man putting things into a
          bag--silverware, bric-a-brac, ornaments,
          jewelry--all her mother’s pretty things.

          The girl drew in her breath sharply. The burglar
          turned. His little eyes glared at her--a slim
          little creature with a halo of golden hair and
          a revolver--and blue eyes that looked into his
          unafraid.

          For a moment they kept the pose. Then--

          “It’s loaded,” said the girl. “Don’t you think
          you’d better drop my mamma’s silver comb?”

          The burglar did. Likewise a rope of pearls.

          “Hadn’t you better turn the bag upside down on the
          bed there?” the girl continued.

          The burglar, without a word, complied.

          Then she made him turn his pockets inside out, and,
          keeping the revolver trained on him, walked him
          down the steps and onto the porch.

          And there he turned and spoke.

          “Say, kid, you’re all right,” he affirmed, and
          walked away.

          And Helen went and told the neighbors--and was
          afraid to go back into the home she had just
          defended--until the arrival of her mother.

          *       *       *       *       *

          HIGHWAY ROBBERY

          _Chicago Herald_

          About to be married and needing money, Edward
          Russell, 19 years old, decided it would be easier
          to steal the money than work for it.

          So he turned auto robber, and was captured with
          three other young men, after they held up Edward
          Bessinger and took his satchel, containing $3,000.
          They told their stories yesterday in the Chicago
          avenue police station and gave their strange
          motives for becoming criminals.

          “I was going to be married and knew I would need a
          lot of money,” said Russell. “I couldn’t get enough
          by working and thought a holdup would be the best
          way.”

          John Harper said he joined the other robbers
          because his father was in trouble.

          “He is a saloon-keeper in Walsingham, Ill., and was
          caught staying open after hours,” said Harper. “He
          needed money to help him out, and the only way I
          had to get it was to steal it.”

          “I was just trying to collect what Bessinger owed
          me,” declared Arthur Raymond, who planned the
          robbery. “I worked in the Bessinger restaurant at
          Halsted and Hamilton streets and got paid next to
          nothing for it. You can’t work for such small wages
          and have any money.

          “I decided I would get enough out of Bessinger to
          pay me handsomely for the time I worked there. I
          knew he carried money in the satchel and planned
          the holdup.”

          “Let the others talk themselves into the
          penitentiary if they want to,” said George Wilson,
          the fourth prisoner. “I have nothing to say about
          it. We tried and fell down. That’s all.”

          The four men were arrested after they had run their
          automobile into a fence while trying to escape
          with the satchel. They had knocked down Bessinger,
          who is a collector for the Bessinger Restaurant
          Company, and the automobile ran over his leg,
          causing the machine to swerve. The money satchel
          was recovered.

          *       *       *       *       *

          THEFT OR LOSS

          _Milwaukee Evening Wisconsin_

          It will be Christmas without the “merry” for Jules
          Alexander, Brussels, Belgium, who will spend it
          in Milwaukee penniless, because of either an evil
          twist of fate or the daring of a hotel thief.

          Monsieur Alexander, a young Belgian, is an American
          representative of a large machinery plant in
          Brussels. He has been in Milwaukee about two weeks
          and is staying at the Hotel Pfister.

          Thursday afternoon M. Alexander decided that his
          suit needed pressing. Hurriedly--it must have been
          hurriedly--he made a change of wardrobe, rang for
          a bellboy and had the suit taken down to the hotel
          tailor.

          Little did M. Alexander know that a $130 roll of
          crinkly American bills, practically his assets
          in toto, reposed in the left hand hip pocket of
          the tailor-bound trousers. In the newly donned
          suit there was not a franc, not a sou, not even a
          centime.

          Later in the afternoon, having left the hotel, M.
          Alexander had use for some change. He felt in his
          hip pocket and found nothing. He found the same
          thing in all his other pockets. All at once it
          dawned on him that he had left the precious roll of
          bills in the other suit.

          M. Alexander went back to the hotel on the run. He
          told the clerk of his loss. Quickly but quietly
          a search for the lost or stolen money was made
          through the hotel, but without avail. Evidently
          both tailor and bellboy declared that they knew
          nothing of the money.

          M. Alexander is positive that the roll of bills
          was in the pocket of the trousers sent down to the
          tailor. As the tailor is in the same building,
          there was no chance of the money’s dropping on the
          street, and yet the hotel corridors, elevators and
          lobbies have been searched inch by inch.

          This morning M. Alexander went to the central
          police station and reported the loss, or theft.
          Detective Paul Pergande was detailed on the case.

          “It was 650 francs I lose; all I had, aussi,” said
          M. Alexander this morning, with a deprecatory
          French shrug of the shoulders. “I do not know what
          shall I do if the gendarmerie, the police, soon
          do not find the money. It is of a probability,
          certainement, that I can get some more, but it will
          take time and I am what you call ‘broke’--n’est-ce
          pas?

          “You see, monsieur, my compagnie--it is in
          Bruxelles--allow me an expense account and we
          representateefs do not carry with us so much. That
          which one has stolen is all that I had. Voila!

          “I must find that money, monsieur. Certainement I
          can explain to our New York agents and they will
          send me some money to live with. Assuredly I hope
          that they will not doubt my explanation and wonder
          how I use so much expense account. Six hundred and
          fifty francs--it is much, monsieur!

          “King Albert, I? Oh, oui, we have a new and fine
          king, but just now I worry so about my money that I
          have not thought much of our new king.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          HOLD-UP

          _Kansas City Star_

          Liquor was responsible for starting out two young
          men last night on a brief career as holdup men
          which lasted only a few hours and ended in cells
          at police headquarters at midnight. The men are
          Herbert Wilson, 24 years old, 910 East Nineteenth
          Street, and Sherwin Carter, 28 years old, 143 Payne
          Avenue. Carter is married.

          The holdups were eight in number, occurring in the
          district between Twenty-first and Thirty-seventh
          streets and Penn Street and Forest Avenue. The loot
          obtained amounted to $12 in cash, eight diamond
          rings, four purses and three watches. The robberies
          came in quick succession and so did the calls of
          the victims to police headquarters. Two policemen
          in a motor car finally caught the pair at Linwood
          Boulevard and Forest Avenue.

          Carter is the son of Dr. Eugene Carter, Hampshire
          Apartments, president of Standard Lumber Company.
          Doctor Carter, when notified of his son’s arrest,
          immediately blamed liquor for the young man’s
          downfall and said that ordinarily he was a “good
          boy.”

          “I’d been drinking for three days and didn’t know
          what I was doing last night,” young Carter said
          this morning at police headquarters. “I was out of
          a job and didn’t have any money to speak of. And,
          say, I’m kind of responsible for Wilson’s getting
          into this, too. It was my scheme to hold up people.

          “I’ve been a little wild, but I’ve never been in
          trouble for holding up people. Say, this’ll be hard
          on my wife.”

          Wilson, too, blamed liquor.

          “I’d never have dreamed of robbing people if I
          hadn’t been drunk,” he said. “Carter thought it
          would be an easy way to get some money and so we
          went and borrowed a gun from a negro that he knew
          and went to holding up people. I’d hold the gun and
          Carter would search them.”

          Both men were shaking and wild-eyed this morning.
          After their continued drinking of whisky for three
          days, their nerves were far from steady.

          *       *       *       *       *

          HOLD-UP

          _Kansas City Star_

          .......................................................
          . See now how real life beats the reel life every     .
          . now and then. Here, for instance, is the strange    .
          . history of The Man in the Black Mask, as acted upon .
          . the stage of Kansas City’s streets in the deserted  .
          . hours of the morning when everybody slumbers except .
          . holdup men, belated wayfarers and policemen.        .
          .......................................................

          REAL I.

          Ed Wilson, alias E. Harry Miller, known in the
          family album at police headquarters as a “gunman,”
          fares forth very early this morning with a
          companion to make his living. At 2:30 o’clock at
          Thirteenth and Charlotte streets, they meet a man
          and begin their pleasant labors.

          “Don’t do it, gents,” says the stranger, “don’t do
          it. It ain’t perfessional. I’m one of the same.
          Here’s my gun and here’s my black mask. See?”

          “Excuses,” says Spokesman Ed. “Have ’em back. Luck
          to you.”

          REAL II.

          Frank Mathis, one of those belated wayfarers who
          afford occupation to holdup men, is held up half
          an hour later at Thirteenth and Charlotte streets
          by two men. By the illumination of an arc light he
          observes the two closely. So does Timothy Dalton,
          policeman. Timothy comes up rapidly and the two
          flee, bombarding the air, Timothy doing the same.
          The robbers escape.

          Mathis then furnishes Timothy descriptions of the
          two, which Timothy, in turn, furnishes police
          headquarters, which, in turn, furnishes them to
          whatever policemen can be reached by telephone.

          REAL III.

          (_In two scenes._)

          SCENE I--Frank Hoover, another policeman with
          insomnia, sees a man approach him at Eleventh and
          Charlotte streets about 4 o’clock. The man seems
          to answer the description of one of the two holdup
          chaps.

          Hoover runs and so does the man.

          Another batch of shots are fired. This time they
          find lodging.

          The fleeing man drops with a bullet in the left
          leg and another in the left hip. Hoover stoops
          down, picks up something clutched in the wounded
          man’s hand, stares at it curiously, puts it in his
          pocket. The ambulance arrives and the wounded man
          is taken to the General Hospital.

          SCENE II--Furnished with descriptions of the two
          fleeing holdup men, another policeman at 4 o’clock
          at Tenth and Holmes streets, arrests Ed Wilson, our
          hero of “Real 1.”

          REAL IV.

          At police headquarters today Wilson is identified
          by Mathis as one of the pair who held him up.

          Wilson agrees with him and tells his partner’s name.

          Mathis then goes to the hospital, but fails to
          identify the wounded man, who gives the name of
          Harry Walters.

          From this Wilson gathers that the wounded man is
          not his pal.

          But who, then, is he?

          “You say this Hoover cop picked up something when
          he shot the fellow?” queries Wilson.

          “What was it?”

          “A black mask, eh? Well, ain’t that the limit?”

          “Why, that must be the fellow we held up to begin
          with and turned loose because he was in the
          business.

          “And here he goes and gets shot because a cop
          thinks he looks like me. That’s luck for you!”

          *       *       *       *       *

          STREET CAR BANDIT

          _Los Angeles Times_

          Two pairs of arms entwined the neck of Harry
          Blair, wounded and confessed streetcar bandit, as
          he lay chained to a cot in the Emergency Hospital
          yesterday morning. While his young wife embraced
          him, sobbing, their year-old baby laughed and
          cooed. He crawled across the pillow on which
          Blair’s head rested, and, snuggling close to his
          father, threw his chubby arms around Blair’s neck.

          Hospital folk and the police are used to pathetic
          scenes in the hospital, but that sight seemed too
          much for them, and silently they stole from the
          ward and closed the door, leaving the wife to her
          grief, the husband to whatever thoughts he had, and
          the innocent babe to its joy.

          It was a decidedly hard-luck story that the Blairs
          related to the detectives and nurses. The first
          year of their married life happiness and prosperity
          smiled on them, they said. But when the stork
          visited the Blair household in Dallas it brought
          not only a bright-eyed baby but also a nemesis.

          Their savings went for doctor’s bills and clothing
          for the little one. Then Blair had difficulty, he
          says, in finding steady employment at his trade,
          painting. When they were reduced almost to poverty
          they decided to come to Los Angeles. They have been
          here six weeks. In that time, Blair says, he was
          unable to earn enough to provide properly for his
          sick wife and impoverished baby.

          The last dollar the couple had went a few days
          ago for rent. Weary of tramping the streets in
          quest of work, weak from lack of nourishment, and
          worried because he couldn’t buy food, clothing
          and medicine, Blair says he conceived the idea of
          turning highwayman.

          “Even then my nemesis followed me,” he said,
          choking. “I got a few dollars from the conductor
          and was hurrying home to give it to my wife for
          food and things when I was stopped by a police
          officer. I escaped from him and was climbing a
          fence when the bullet caught me in the leg.”

          Blair will be confined in the criminal ward at the
          County Hospital until he is physically able to be
          arraigned. He will be charged with highway robbery,
          the police say.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FREE-FOR-ALL FIGHT

          _New York World_

          With whistle screeching and hundreds of passengers
          yelling for help out of the windows, a northbound
          Third avenue elevated train was held in panic late
          last night by a crowd of roughs, who terrorized the
          passengers and assaulted a conductor.

          More than a dozen women, returning from the
          theatre, fainted, and Mrs. Sadie Arthur, of No.
          991 East One Hundred and Seventy-eighth street,
          was thrown into violent hysterics and taken to the
          Lebanon Hospital.

          The riot started at One Hundred and Thirty-eighth
          street and continued all the way to One Hundred
          and Sixty-sixth street. There policemen shoved
          through a great crowd, which had been attracted
          by the whistling, and arrested Adolph J. Weiss,
          eighteen years old, of No. 444 East One Hundred
          and Sixty-fifth street. His companions in the
          excitement managed to escape.

          Weiss, who is somewhat of a fighter, was the
          ringleader of the disturbers. They began their
          horseplay by throwing hats about the car, smashing
          hats and jostling the passengers. Dresses were
          torn and women insulted; yet no one took a hand to
          suppress the outrage.

          “Shame on you men,” cried some of the women.
          “Haven’t any of you enough spirit to protect us?”

          Just as one woman received a severe blow in the
          face, Conductor Thomas J. Boyce, of No. 108 East
          One Hundred and Twenty-first street, who is known
          on the road as “Scrappy Tom,” jumped into the
          fracas and hit straight from the shoulder.

          “Beat him up,” yelled the gang, and they all jumped
          on “Scrappy Tom.”

          “Come on, all of you,” he roared, his fighting
          Irish blood aroused. One, two, three of the
          brawlers hit the dusty mat, and finally Boyce
          reached Adolph and landed hard on his jaw.

          The fight ranged up and down the car, with Boyce
          taking care of the entire gang. Three or four
          women who had fainted and fallen to the floor were
          trampled upon.

          Windows were raised throughout the train. Yells
          of “Murder!” “Police!” alarmed the Bronx. The
          motorman started his whistle going, and this tipped
          Policemen Wilson and Dempsey, of the Morrisania
          station, who lay in wait at One Hundred and
          Sixty-sixth street.

          The crowd that was bunched there prevented their
          making more arrests and furnished a means of escape
          to Weiss’s “pals.”

          Pieces of hats, feathers, ribbons and lingerie were
          scattered from end to end of the car. A number
          of the women had not revived, and Mrs. Arthur
          appeared to be in a critical condition. A hurry
          call was sent to Lebanon Hospital, and Dr. Singer,
          hastily treating the others, hurried Mrs. Arthur
          to the institution. He said she was in a dangerous
          hysterical condition.

          The line was tied up for half an hour by the riot.

          Weiss looked as though he had stayed in the ring
          twenty rounds with Bill Papke. His face was
          unrecognizable.

          “I never knew that any of these conductors could
          fight,” he sputtered through swollen lips, as he
          was led to a cell.

          “Over in the old country,” said “Scrappy Tom,” as
          he watched the ex-champion led to a cell in the
          Morrisania station, “I used to throw a couple of
          lads like you over my head before breakfast just
          for an appetizer.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          MURDER OF BUSINESS MAN

          _New York Tribune_

          Walter H. Hammond, a well known business man of
          Jersey City and a brother of Colonel Robert A.
          Hammond, was shot and instantly killed yesterday
          afternoon in the Pennsylvania Railroad Company’s
          ferry house at Jersey City. Peter Grew, a man he
          had befriended, was arrested as the slayer of
          Hammond.

          Mr. Hammond was about to have his luncheon in the
          restaurant in the railway station, on the second
          floor. He had ascended the stairs and turned toward
          the restaurant, when he was confronted by Grew, to
          whom he made a cheery remark. Without a word in
          reply, the police say, Grew drew a revolver, which
          he carried in his coat pocket, and fired at him.
          The bullet entered the left temple and ploughed
          into the brain. Two more bullets were fired into
          his body after he fell.

          Calmly replacing the weapon in his pocket, Grew
          started to walk down the stairs to the street,
          but Patrolman Amann, who was on duty at the ferry
          house, dashed up the stairs and, meeting him half
          way, arrested him. Grew remarked, Amann says, as
          he handed the revolver to the officer: “The thing
          is all over, and I might as well give up.” Later
          he persistently refused to admit that he did the
          shooting.

          The police say their investigation has revealed
          that Grew, who has been regarded as eccentric
          and impulsive, had frequently threatened to kill
          Hammond. They say that Grew had recently been
          drinking excessively.

          The victim of the shooting was the head of the
          Hammond and Wilson Stock Company, dealers in
          butterine and eggs at Jerome and 4th streets,
          Jersey City. He was a bachelor and forty-two years
          old. He was a director of the Second National Bank
          and of the Commercial Trust Company, and an active
          member of the Union League Club, of Jersey City. He
          lived at No. 314 Harrison avenue, Jersey City.

          Grew had been in the same business. Some time ago,
          the police say, he was arrested in Brooklyn for
          making and selling oleomargarine without stamping
          it properly. Hammond gave him a new start in
          business. His business dwindled to nothing, and
          he accused Hammond of persecuting him. Grew owned
          a flathouse at No. 244 3d street, Jersey City, in
          which he, his wife and six children lived. This
          house he conveyed to his wife during his business
          troubles. It is said that Grew complained that his
          wife was under the influence of Mr. Hammond and
          refused to permit him to have any of the revenue
          derived from the rental of the building. Ten days
          ago he was arrested for beating her. Judge Harmon,
          before whom he was arraigned, ordered him committed
          to jail for ten days, but relented when he promised
          to refrain from abusing or beating his wife.

          Otto S. Wilkins, of No. 21 Park street, who has a
          butter business at No. 52 Hudson street, Jersey
          City, met Grew less than an hour before the
          shooting. He told Captain Larkins, at the Jersey
          City Police Headquarters, of a conversation he had
          had with Grew. He said that Grew asked him to give
          him a job.

          “I then told him,” Mr. Wilkins said, “that I
          understood that he was in such a financial
          condition that he could live without working. He
          said, ‘No,’ that his property brought him in $120
          a month, and that after he had paid the interest
          on a small loan which stood against it, with taxes
          and repairs, it left very little to live on; that
          his wife would not let him have any of that, and
          that Mr. Hammond was responsible for her attitude
          in withholding funds from him. He was in a natural
          state of mind to-day, cool and collected, and
          talked to me in the same strain that I have always
          known him to use. He used to tell me four or five
          years ago that he had it in for Mr. Hammond and
          would shoot him some time.”

          In a statement to the police Grew said he had known
          Hammond for sixteen years and had done business
          with him. “I am not going to answer that,” was his
          reply when asked if he had had any trouble with
          Hammond. He said that he was on his way home from
          Manhattan when he met Hammond, and that Hammond
          spoke to him, but he did not reply. “I had the
          revolver in my right hand in the inside pocket of
          my sack coat,” said Grew, “and that is all I have
          to say.” He stated that “Hammond had been pounding
          me and had got the inspectors to pound me.”

          Mrs. Grew said that her husband’s mind had been
          affected by brooding over his failure in business,
          and she shared her husband’s opinion that he had
          been persecuted.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MURDER IN LITTLE ITALY

          _Kansas City Star_

          MURDERS IN LITTLE ITALY SINCE JANUARY 1.

          January 9--Mario Ippolito shot down and killed by
          unidentified assassin.

          January 11--John Kanato shot by John Herwetine;
          died two days later.

          January 23--John Janoka shot by Nick Hontrogen;
          died same day.

          January 24--Lusciano Musso murdered by gunmen in
          daylight.

          February 4--Salvador Cangialosi shot and killed by
          Angelo Mannino.

          February 24--Giovanni Seculo shot down by
          unidentified assassin, will die.

          SHOOTINGS.

          January 24--H. C. Petro, shot in his home, 110
          Watkins Avenue, by someone who fired through the
          window; not fatal.

          February 13--Robert Jordan, 1039 East Fourth
          Street, was shot twice by Tony Filo; not fatal.

          That impenetrable air of mystery which closed down
          on the attack last night on two Italians, as it has
          closed down upon every one of the weekly murders
          of Little Italy, a sable cloak hiding details,
          obliterating the trails of assassins who shoot men
          in the back and flee, is not such a mysterious
          thing after all. There is only one policeman at
          night in Little Italy.

          Giovanni Seculo and Tony Boni are walking along
          Cherry Street near Fourth Street. It is 10 o’clock
          at night. A shotgun barks, once, twice. Seculo
          falls, a death wound in his back. Boni falls, shot
          in the hip.

          Presently a policeman comes, who was blocks distant
          at the time.

          Little Italy shrugs and avers it was all sound
          asleep when Seculo and his companion were shot.

          The assassin escapes.

          There is nothing different in the main threads
          of the chronicle from those of all the other
          unpunished crimes of Little Italy.

          Always, the crime is committed in some part of
          Little Italy distant from that lone policeman.
          Little Italy extends from Independence Avenue to
          the Missouri River, from Oak Street to Tracy Avenue.

          “There should be at least four policemen in that
          district at night,” said Larry Ghent, chief of
          detectives, this morning. Then he revealed some
          figures on the police department.

          In the district comprising Little Italy, Hick’s
          and Belvidere hollows, which are unsavory negro
          neighborhoods, and others almost as notorious, a
          district extending north of Independence Avenue
          and east of Main Street to Jackson Avenue, there
          are at night only four patrolmen.

          In the central district, taking in the whole of
          the North Side, fourteen out of thirty-one police
          “beats” are without patrolmen at night.

          In all Kansas City there are only 264 patrolmen,
          exclusive of officers. Many of these work as clerks
          in stations. The police force is at the lowest that
          it has been for years. The city is increasing in
          population.

          Ghent withdrew detectives from other cases this
          morning and sent four of them, under the direction
          of Patrolman Louis Olivero, into Little Italy to
          attempt to ferret out the attack on Seculo last
          night.

          Seculo, proprietor of the Neopolitan Macaroni
          factory at 516-18 East Tenth Street, and an
          influential Italian, probably will die. His
          condition was slightly improved today, however.
          Neither Seculo nor Boni knows why he was attacked
          or by whom.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MURDER

          _New York Sun_

          Trying door knobs early yesterday morning,
          Policeman Merkle of the East 104th street station
          found that the door of the little Italian grocery
          shop at 321 East 109th street opened. He entered,
          thinking that the place might have been robbed.
          At the rear of the dark, smelly little shop he
          found another door that opened, and as it did so,
          a bulldog sprang at him. The policeman shut the
          door and ran out to the street and rapped for
          assistance. Policeman O’Connell came and the two
          went back into the store.

          They coaxed the dog into good humor, and, on
          lighting the gas in the squalid room, they found
          its master kneeling beside his bed in a pool of
          blood. Another door in the rear was forced open.
          Peter Mutolo, who lives there with his wife and
          three children, said they had heard no noise.

          They said that the murdered man was Frederick
          Cinci, who had kept the shop about a month. He had
          been in this country about a year. No one knew of
          any enemies.

          On the table were three dirty glasses and an empty
          wine bottle. Friends sometimes came to see him, the
          neighbors said. Nobody knew whether visitors came
          to see him before his death. On the floor below his
          body they found a stiletto, long of blade, which
          was bent double. In his neck, lungs, stomach and
          kidneys the ambulance surgeon found five thrusts.

          The body was still warm; death hadn’t come long
          before the police found him. Some money, $1.60,
          was found in his pockets, and his gold watch had
          not been taken. Six dollars was found in the cash
          drawer of his shop. No one killed him to rob him
          of money. The dog, the police think, would have
          attacked a stranger and probably recognized the
          murderer.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MURDER

          _New York World_

          Pietro de Angelo ran along Columbus avenue,
          Montclair, N. J., yesterday. Plainly De Angelo, a
          sturdy fellow of twenty-two years, had run far and
          hard. He came from the direction of the Brookdale
          section of Bloomfield. He was leg weary, his steps
          grew shorter. Panting, he looked over his shoulder
          ever and again at an older man who ran behind him
          at some distance.

          The older man carried a shotgun which swung by
          his side in his grasp as he plodded along. He
          seemed to be in no hurry; he seemed to be able to
          run forever; straight he ran, with his eyes fixed
          always on De Angelo, who looked back, fearfully.

          Christopher street and Columbus avenue is the most
          fashionable part of Montclair. Wealthy persons
          live in that neighborhood. Men on the street or
          looking from their dwellings had no idea of the
          tragedy that was to be enacted. Being law-abiding,
          having no reason to run, in flight or pursuit, the
          Montclair men thought that De Angelo and the older
          man who ran behind him were both fleeing from the
          same pursuer.

          “The police are after those fellows,” said one
          Montclair man.

          “Or the game wardens,” said another. “See, the
          second chap has a shotgun--been poaching most
          likely. The young fellow has outstripped him.”

          Not so. Where Christopher street intersects
          Columbus avenue De Angelo halted, swayed, almost
          fell. His bolt was shot, his breath was spent. He
          turned and slowly walked back to the older man, who
          did not even hasten his gait, but approached De
          Angelo--approached as inexorably as death itself.
          As he got nearer, De Angelo stretched out his hands
          toward him in mute pleading. The older man, never
          hurrying, never slackening his gait, got within ten
          yards of De Angelo, stopped, raised his shotgun
          to his shoulder, pulled the trigger, and sent the
          charge from one barrel into De Angelo’s left breast.

          The younger man pitched down on his face, arms
          extended, palms down. The older man looked down at
          him an instant--yes, one barrel was enough--then,
          dropping the gun from his shoulder, he kept on
          running, no faster, no slower, than before.

          And he escaped. A dozen most respectable citizens
          of Montclair all had the same thought, to notify
          the police. The dozen rushed to their telephones.
          When the police arrived De Angelo was dead. He had
          died instantly.

          Deputy County Physician Muta went from Orange and
          had the body taken to the Morgue at Orange. De
          Angelo lived at No. 961 Wilson street, Montclair.
          His parents say he had dinner with them there at
          noon, then went out. They do not know where he
          went. The police are trying to learn.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MURDER

          _Kansas City Star_

          In the parlor of the rooming house at 57 Green
          Street A. C. Hobson was busily tuning the piano
          this morning. As he bent above the humming wires,
          the lid of the instrument thrown back, a light step
          sounded down the corridor. Then he heard a fresh
          young voice, singing softly. Hobson smiled and
          ceased his work to listen.

          The voice sang a line or two touching on cows and
          green fields.

          “A kid from the country,” Hobson said, and went on.

          A heavier step clumped on the stairway leading up
          from the street entrance. The song ceased abruptly.

          “Hello, Maggie,” Hobson heard a man’s voice say.
          “What made you leave me?”

          There was a little pause; then a girl’s voice
          answered sharply:

          “Why do you follow me, anyhow? I don’t love you.”

          “I came to take you back with me,” said the man.
          Hobson had stopped his tinkering. The sound of the
          man’s heavy breathing came in to him through the
          open doorway from the dim corridor. “Kiss me,” the
          man’s voice commanded.

          The girl’s voice rose. “No,” she cried. “No. I
          don’t love you.”

          The man swore. “Then no one else’ll have you,” he
          shouted.

          Hobson stood motionless, as though paralyzed. Then
          he heard a scuffle; the girl cried out sharply. The
          restraint on him was broken at that, and Hobson
          rushed into the corridor. The struggling forms of
          man and woman were disappearing through the doorway
          of another room down the hall. An instant or two
          later, Hobson heard the crack of a revolver shot
          followed closely by a second. Then the moans of a
          woman in agony succeeded. Hobson ran into the room.
          Man and woman writhed on the bed.

          Going to a telephone, Hobson summoned the police.
          Sergt. James O’Rile, acting captain of the
          Walnut Street Police Station, responded. It was
          twenty-five minutes before the ambulance arrived.

          The woman was Mrs. Maggie Towes, 24 years old,
          who left her husband, John Towes, in Homeville,
          Mo., four months ago. Towes came to Kansas City a
          week ago, finally, this morning, finding his wife
          at the rooming house of Mrs. Mary Howe, where she
          had found employment as housekeeper. Towes is a
          blacksmith’s helper and is 32 years old.

          As he lay on the bed in that twilight state between
          the conscious and the unconscious, Towes reached a
          hand gropingly towards his wife.

          “Kiss me, honey,” he mumbled; “kiss me before I go.”

          They were taken to the General Hospital. Mrs. Towes
          was shot through the abdomen, Towes through the
          left breast. Both probably will die.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MURDER

          _New York Sun_[A]

          [A] Written by Frank Ward O’Malley.

          Mrs. Catherine Sheehan stood in the darkened parlor
          of her home at 361 West Fifteenth street late
          yesterday afternoon, and told her version of the
          murder of her son Gene, the youthful policeman whom
          a thug named Billy Morley shot in the forehead,
          down under the Chatham Square elevated station
          early yesterday morning. Gene’s mother was thankful
          that her boy hadn’t killed Billy Morley before he
          died, “because,” she said, “I can say honestly,
          even now, that I’d rather have Gene’s dead body
          brought home to me, as it will be to-night, than to
          have him come to me and say, ‘Mother, I had to kill
          a man this morning.’

          “God comfort the poor wretch that killed the boy,”
          the mother went on, “because he is more unhappy
          to-night than we are here. Maybe he was weak-minded
          through drink. He couldn’t have known Gene or he
          wouldn’t have killed him. Did they tell you at the
          Oak Street Station that the other policemen called
          Gene Happy Sheehan? Anything they told you about
          him is true, because no one would lie about him. He
          was always happy, and he was a fine-looking young
          man, and he always had to duck his helmet when he
          walked under the gas fixture in the hall, as he
          went out the door.

          “He was doing dance steps on the floor of the
          basement, after his dinner yesterday noon for the
          girls--his sisters I mean--and he stopped of a
          sudden when he saw the clock and picked up his
          helmet. Out on the street he made pretence of
          arresting a little boy he knows, who was standing
          there--to see Gene come out, I suppose--and when
          the lad ran away laughing, I called out, ‘You
          couldn’t catch Willie, Gene; you’re getting fat.’

          “‘Yes, and old, mammy,’ he said, him who is--who
          was--only twenty-six--‘so fat,’ he said, ‘that I’m
          getting a new dress coat that’ll make you proud
          when you see me in it, mammy.’ And he went over
          Fifteenth street whistling a tune and slapping his
          leg with a folded newspaper. And he hasn’t come
          back again.

          “But I saw him once after that, thank God, before
          he was shot. It’s strange, isn’t it, that I hunted
          him up on his beat late yesterday afternoon for
          the first time in my life? I never go around where
          my children are working or studying--one I sent
          through college with what I earned at dressmaking,
          and some other little money I had, and he’s now a
          teacher; and the youngest I have at college now. I
          don’t mean that their father wouldn’t send them if
          he could, but he’s an invalid, although he’s got a
          position lately that isn’t too hard for him. I got
          Gene prepared for college, too, but he wanted to go
          right into an office in Wall street. I got him in
          there, but it was too quiet and tame for him, Lord
          have mercy on his soul; and then, two years ago, he
          wanted to go on the police force, and he went.

          “After he went down the street yesterday I found
          a little book on a chair, a little list of the
          streets or something, that Gene had forgot. I knew
          how particular they are about such things, and I
          didn’t want the boy to get in trouble, and so I
          threw on a shawl and walked over through Chambers
          street toward the river to find him. He was
          standing on a corner some place down there near the
          bridge clapping time with his hands for a little
          newsy that was dancing; but he stopped clapping,
          struck, Gene did, when he saw me. He laughed when
          I handed him the little book and told that was why
          I’d searched for him, patting me on the shoulder
          when he laughed--patting me on the shoulder.

          “‘It’s a bad place for you here, Gene,’ I said.
          ‘Then it must be bad for you, too, mammy,’ said he;
          and as he walked to the end of his beat with me--it
          was dark then--he said, ‘There are lots of crooks
          here, mother, and they know and hate me and they’re
          afraid of me’--proud, he said it--‘but maybe
          they’ll get me some night.’ He patted me on the
          back and turned and walked east toward his death.
          Wasn’t it strange that Gene said that?

          “You know how he was killed, of course, and how--
          Now let me talk about it, children, if I want to.
          I promised you, didn’t I, that I wouldn’t cry any
          more or carry on? Well, it was five o’clock this
          morning when a boy rang the bell here at the house
          and I looked out the window and said, ‘Is Gene
          dead?’ ‘No, ma’am,’ answered the lad, ‘but they
          told me to tell you he was hurt in a fire and is
          in the hospital.’ Jerry, my other boy, had opened
          the door for the lad and was talking to him while
          I dressed a bit. And then I walked down stairs and
          saw Jerry standing silent under the gaslight, and
          I said again, ‘Jerry, is Gene dead?’ And he said
          ‘Yes,’ and he went out.

          “After a while I went down to the Oak Street
          Station myself, because I couldn’t wait for Jerry
          to come back. The policemen all stopped talking
          when I came in, and then one of them told me it was
          against the rules to show me Gene at that time. But
          I knew the policeman only thought I’d break down,
          but I promised him I wouldn’t carry on, and he took
          me into a room to let me see Gene. It was Gene.

          “I know to-day how they killed him. The poor boy
          that shot him was standing in Chatham Square
          arguing with another man when Gene told him to move
          on. When the young man wouldn’t, but only answered
          back, Gene shoved him, and the young man pulled a
          revolver and shot Gene in the face, and he died
          before Father Rafferty, of St. James’s, got to him.
          God rest his soul. A lot of policemen heard the
          shot and they all came running with their pistols
          and clubs in their hands. Policeman Laux--I’ll
          never forget his name or any of the others that
          ran to help Gene--came down the Bowery and ran out
          into the middle of the square where Gene lay.

          “When the man that shot Gene saw the policemen
          coming, he crouched down and shot at Policeman
          Laux, but, thank God, he missed him. Then policemen
          named Harrington and Rouke and Moran and Kehoe
          chased the man all around the streets there, some
          heading him off when he tried to run into that
          street that goes off at an angle--East Broadway,
          is it?--a big crowd had come out of Chinatown now
          and was chasing the man, too, until Policemen Rouke
          and Kehoe got him backed up against a wall. When
          Policeman Kehoe came up close, the man shot his
          pistol right at Kehoe and the bullet grazed Kehoe’s
          helmet.

          “All the policemen jumped at the man then, and one
          of them knocked the pistol out of his hand with a
          blow of a club. They beat him, this Billy Morley,
          so Jerry says his name is, but they had to because
          he fought so hard. They told me this evening that
          it will go hard with the unfortunate murderer,
          because Jerry says that when a man named Frank
          O’Hare, who was arrested this evening charged with
          stealing cloth or something, was being taken into
          headquarters, he told Detective Gegan that he and
          a one-armed man who answered to the description of
          Morley, the young man who killed Gene, had a drink
          last night in a saloon at Twenty-second street
          and Avenue A and that when the one-armed man was
          leaving the saloon he turned and said, ‘Boys, I’m
          going out now to bang a guy with buttons.’

          “They haven’t brought me Gene’s body yet. Coroner
          Shrady, so my Jerry says, held Billy Morley, the
          murderer, without letting him get out on bail, and
          I suppose that in a case like this they have to do
          a lot of things before they can let me have the
          body here. If Gene only hadn’t died before Father
          Rafferty got to him, I’d be happier. He didn’t need
          to make his confession, you know, but it would have
          been better, wouldn’t it? He wasn’t bad, and he
          went to mass on Sunday without being told; and even
          in Lent, when we always say the rosary out loud in
          the dining-room every night, Gene himself said to
          me the day after Ash Wednesday, ‘If you want to say
          the rosary at noon, mammy, before I go out, instead
          of at night when I can’t be here, we’ll do it.’

          “God will see that Gene’s happy tonight, won’t he,
          after Gene said that?” the mother asked as she
          walked out into the hallway with her black-robed
          daughters grouped behind her. “I know he will,”
          she said, “and I’ll--” She stopped with an arm
          resting on the banister to support her. “I--I know
          I promised you, girls,” said Gene’s mother, “that
          I’d try not to cry any more, but I can’t help it.”
          And she turned toward the wall and covered her face
          with her apron.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MURDER

          _Kansas City Star_

          A boy of 19, carefree, enamored of the life of the
          road, ran away from a good home in Elm Grove, Kas.,
          on a sunny day last March.

          Down in the wilds of Northern Arkansas, riding in
          a freight car, one day in the middle of March,
          a brakeman came upon him and they fought--the
          brakeman angered at the lad, the boy hot with the
          lust of youth that welcomes a fray.

          The boy, Charles Hyde, hit the brakeman on the
          head with a bolt. The brakeman went down, like a
          shot thing, and fell from the car under the flying
          wheels, which ground him to death.

          Then the boy went on. Later he heard a coroner’s
          jury had reached a verdict of “accidental death.”

          Then began the flight. It was flight--not from the
          far-reaching arm of the law; for the verdict of the
          backwoods jury had placed no suspicion on any man.
          But it was flight from a dread thing that haunted
          him, making his nights of no comfort and his days
          of dark despair.

          Conscience, men call it, and Retribution. But by
          whatever name, under whatever guise, the dread
          thing caught the boy at last, caught and enfolded
          him. And the lad who had been carefree a few short
          months ago, now a trembling, quaking, white-faced
          wreck, stumbled into the Mulberry Street police
          station, down in the West Bottoms yesterday--and
          surrendered.

          “I killed a man,” he said. “I killed a man when I
          didn’t have any idea of doing it. And he’s been
          after me. I’ve got to give myself up; I’ve got to
          confess. It’s the only way I can get rid of it.”

          They heard the boy out, those policemen in the
          bottoms, not understanding, sensing only dimly
          the fear that was on him. Then they took him to
          police headquarters and wired to the authorities in
          Arkansas.

          “Last night wasn’t so bad,” said Hyde at police
          headquarters this morning. “It wasn’t so bad, now
          that I have given myself up. That’s made me feel
          better. But all the other nights since it happened
          have been hell. We’d be fighting in the car again,
          with the wheels clicking away underneath us, him
          hot and gettin’ the best of me. Then I’d stumble
          against something and pick it up and feel it in my
          hands, and know he was mine.

          “My God!” said Charles Hyde, helpless toy of fate,
          entrapped in the coils of a retributive nemesis.
          “My God!” And he covered his gaunt boy’s face with
          shaking hands.

          Back and forth, up and down, across the harvest
          lands of the Middle West, went Hyde, riding
          in freight cars, clinging to the rods of
          trans-continentals, always seeking to escape from
          the thing that pursued him--and always failing. In
          the hot fields, laboring with his hands, staggering
          in the heat of the day but pressing on, he found no
          surcease. And then, despite his efforts, hard work
          brought no sleep at night. And he was alone with
          his fear.

          “I know the law’s got me,” he cried. “I know it can
          hang me or put me in prison. But I had to do it. I
          had to give myself up.

          “And to think I never meant to kill him, only to
          lay him out and make him let me alone!”

          Then Charles Hyde cried, not the tears of blessed
          relief, but the scalding tears of those who
          must stand helpless and non-understanding before
          grim-countenanced Fate.

          *       *       *       *       *

          A WAYWARD GIRL

          _Chicago Herald_

          They called her Mandy on the farm and they made
          much of her.

          She was the only daughter the Noyers had and
          nothing was too good for her. So “dad” said--and
          mother agreed.

          Mandy didn’t realize how happy she was. She was
          ambitious and wished to see the city. She had an
          aunt in Chicago, Mrs. H. Bole, of 1856 Dolphin
          street. Why couldn’t she go to Chicago, study
          stenography and live with auntie?

          Her parents didn’t like to have her go, but she
          insisted. So they kissed her and sent her away.

          She went to the Weston School at 175 North Wabash
          avenue for some time--and then, last June, she had
          a quarrel with her aunt and went to live at 1809
          West Wilson street.

          She made the acquaintance of Thomas Hazen of 4009
          Jackson boulevard and Mandy quit the school. Only
          she wasn’t Mandy any more. Her name was Thelma
          Beyers.

          Hazen and the girl, who is only 16 years old, were
          arrested by Detective Sergeant George E. McCormick
          and Mandy wept and told her story.

          It had been a gay life, she said, fascinating and
          swift.

          But if mother and “dad” down in Siddon, Ill., will
          forgive her she will go home and stay there for
          good.

          But Mandy is needed as a witness against Hazen
          and five other young men for whom warrants were
          obtained yesterday.

          And she will have to appear against the proprietors
          of the Congress Café, Charley West’s, the Café De
          Luxe, the Delaware, and eight or ten other cafés
          which sold her gin fizzes, highballs and other
          drinks; and against the owners and proprietors of
          eight or ten hotels that admitted her--a girl just
          out of short skirts--without asking questions.

          Then there is a woman of a good family on the West
          Side who will be charged with contributing to the
          delinquency of a minor.

          So it will be a long time before Mandy can go home.

          *       *       *       *       *

          VIOLATION OF MANN ACT

          _Kansas City Star_

          Michael O’Rourke loved his wife and his two little
          daughters and their little home. That was in
          Airdale eight years ago.

          Then one day Michael discovered something that
          broke him up completely. His little girls’ mother
          was not the kind of woman he had believed her to
          be. It cost Michael more than outsiders could
          realize, but he got a divorce. The court gave him
          the custody of his daughters, Rosie and Maggie.

          He brought them to Kansas City in an effort to
          forget--and to get away from their mother. He put
          them in St. Joseph’s Orphan Home, Thirty-first and
          Jefferson streets, and went to work there himself
          as coachman.

          But the mother did not stay in Airdale. She
          followed her children here and tried to take them
          away from the home. Several times she tried it, but
          the watch kept on the little girls was too close
          and she did not succeed. At last, Michael, fearing
          that sooner or later he would lose them, gave up
          his job and took the girls away. Rosie, the elder,
          did not want to go. Even in those days she was
          attached to her mother.

          Michael took Rosie and Maggie to Seattle, where he
          put them in a convent. Most of his earnings went
          to pay for keeping them there. After a year or two
          he joined the navy and intrusted to Uncle Sam the
          payments for their education from his wages as a
          sailor.

          The long voyages kept him from seeing them more
          than once or twice a year and he fancied they
          were forgetting him. That, and the difficulty of
          providing for them on what he was earning, made
          him desperate. He deserted the navy. He took his
          daughters from the convent and made a home for
          them.

          One day when he was away at work a veiled woman
          drove up to the cottage in a motor car.

          “Why, it’s mamma!” exclaimed Rosie, and rushed to
          greet her.

          When the woman drove away, the girls and their
          belongings went with her. Michael came home that
          night to an empty house.

          He found them in Airdale--in their mother’s house,
          where the blinds were drawn all day long. He
          started habeas corpus proceedings and got back the
          younger girl, then 15 years old. Rosie had become
          18 in the meantime and refused to leave her mother.

          Michael took Maggie to St. Louis and put her in
          a convent there. Up to this time the government
          officials had not troubled him and he had almost
          forgotten that his desertion was still hanging over
          him. But someone told, and Michael was arrested. He
          was convicted and taken to the naval prison in New
          Hampshire.

          A short time later a woman in a motor car stole
          Maggie from the convent. This time there was no one
          to follow them.

          Yesterday in Airdale a house was raided by
          government officers. Rosie and Maggie were found
          there. Their mother, who is known now as Mrs.
          Pearl Perkins, was arrested. She was charged with
          transporting Rosie from Seattle in violation of the
          Mann Act. She will be arraigned before the United
          States commissioner in Springfield today.

          Rosie has gone far on the path her mother led her.
          Maggie was rescued from the same life in the nick
          of time.

          Michael, in his cell, can only wonder what has
          become of them.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CAPTURE OF ESCAPED CONVICT

          _Chicago Inter Ocean_

          Every evening at 5:33 a fast train whizzes through
          the mining town of Denville, Ill., favoring the
          little, box-like station with a derisive flirt of
          its tail car as it takes a curve. Every evening at
          5:30, except when infrequent duties interfere, it
          is the custom of the village constable of Denville
          to saunter up to the “deepo” and solemnly watch the
          flyer pass. Once, they say, a pretty girl waved to
          him from a Pullman window.

          George Brown, station agent at Denville, knows the
          constable’s time as well as that of the train. When
          he thought it was getting pretty near the hour for
          the appearance of constable and flyer yesterday
          afternoon, he looked at his watch. It was 5:20
          o’clock.

          The station agent was particularly anxious to see
          the constable, for he had real news to relate. A
          short time before, answering a ring at the station
          telephone, he had been informed by the deputy
          warden at Joliet penitentiary that Matthew Starn,
          a life convict, with two coldblooded murders to
          his discredit, had escaped from the prison and was
          believed to be headed in the direction of Denville.

          “He’s a cool hand and a mighty desperate man,”
          warned the warden. “Don’t take any chances with him
          if you see him.”

          A few minutes later, while Brown was straining his
          ears for the distant sound of the flyer’s whistle
          and his eyes for a glimpse of the constable, a
          man wearing an ill-fitting, rough, all-enveloping
          garment of blue and a blue cap of the same
          material, walked into the station.

          “When is the next train to St. Louis?” he asked,
          his eyes boring into Brown’s.

          The station agent had instantly recognized the odd
          garb of the man before him as the Joliet uniform.
          He fought to keep his tone even and casual as he
          replied:

          “Can’t get out tonight.”

          Brown turned away, pretending to consult a time
          card hung behind the wicket. Really he was looking
          out the window, hoping to see the familiar form of
          the constable.

          “Well, ain’t you curious about me?” demanded his
          visitor. “How do you think I got here?”

          “Beat a freight, I suppose,” Brown hastily guessed.
          “That’s against the rules, but I always have a
          lot of sympathy for a man like you. What’s your
          trouble?”

          “Broke!” said his visitor, tersely. “I ain’t had
          nothing but hard luck these last five years.”

          In the distance the whistle of the flyer tooted.
          The man in blue eyed a stack of bills in the open
          cash drawer.

          “I don’t know whether to beat it or to--to visit
          a while with you,” he murmured, glancing at the
          station door, and then back again at the cash
          drawer.

          Brown consulted the time card again--and looked
          out the window, inwardly breathing a prayer. Sure
          enough, there was the constable, trudging down the
          road toward the station, a bit behind schedule but
          not speeding to make up lost time.

          “I guess you--you’d better--stay!” said the agent.

          Brown went through a few tense moments after that
          remark, that he said later he wouldn’t experience
          again “if they made me president of the road.”

          The constable took up his stand, not on the station
          platform, as usual, but a couple of hundred feet
          away. Stolidly he watched the flyer pass, then
          looked undecidedly toward the station. He seemed to
          be debating whether or not to forego his routine
          visit with the agent. Twice he turned his back and
          started away, only to halt, wheel and resume his
          meditation. A Niagara of sweat coursed down Brown’s
          cheeks as he waited. The man in blue was standing
          close to the wicket, still peering into the drawer.
          His right hand was in his hip pocket.

          Brown dared direct his gaze out the window no
          longer. He stood silently watching his blue-clad
          visitor, waiting to see what would be in his hand
          when it came from the bulging hip pocket.

          Then the station door opened. In it stood the
          constable. He took in the significance of the blue
          figure as Brown’s sinister visitor wheeled, and
          the Denville police revolver, rusty with age, but
          loaded, flashed from his pocket.

          “Hands up!” remarked the constable.

          Ten minutes later Matthew Starn, escaped “lifer,”
          who had worsted the restraining walls of Joliet,
          was held securely a prisoner in the amateurish
          village calaboose.

          Starn, who is 26, shot and killed two Joliet
          business men, who had the misfortune to resist him
          when he robbed their stores. The “five years of
          hard luck” had been spent in prison, where, despite
          his criminal record, he became a “trusty” through
          good conduct in the penitentiary. At 7:30 o’clock
          yesterday morning he was given a message to deliver
          outside the prison walls. When he did not return
          within an hour two posses of guards, deputies and
          policemen started on his trail and word was flashed
          through the surrounding territory. Denville is
          about twenty miles southeast of Joliet.

          *       *       *       *       *

          STORY OF ESCAPED CONVICT

          _Chicago News_[B]

          [B] By Ben Hecht.

          Lockup Keeper O’Malley brought him out of the cell
          in the detective bureau and he stood in the sun,
          blinking--a little man with brown eyes and a sober,
          deadly sober face.

          “A fella wants to see you, George O’Brien,” said
          Lockup Keeper O’Malley, and left the little man, an
          escaped “lifer” from Joliet, standing against the
          cell wall and blinking. The sun that came through
          the dirty basement window fell full on his face and
          he stood staring into it, twisting his felt hat in
          his hands.

          “They’ll take me back in the morning,” said the
          little man, as if he were talking to himself, as if
          he were repeating something he had sat up all night
          in his cell thinking about. “And I won’t see her. I
          want to explain to her. Good God.”

          It was a prayer. The little man’s throat trembled,
          the muscles of his face quivered and his eyes
          glistened in the sun.

          Four days ago the little man was married, after
          three months of liberty. Fourteen years lay behind
          him when he walked away from the honor farm at
          Joliet. He told the story himself, the whole story
          without any omissions. But first he said again:

          “I don’t care so much about going back; I’m used
          to the life down there. But they’ll put me in
          solitary, with a ball and chain on my feet, and I
          won’t be able to see her for six months--if I don’t
          see her before they take me back.”

          Tears came now and rolled over the drawn face of
          the little man and his voice was so low that the
          listener had to bend down to hear.

          “She didn’t know about my being an escaped lifer,”
          he went on. “I couldn’t tell her. I was afraid. She
          was the first woman who smiled at me after fourteen
          years--when I got my job--and she was like an angel
          to me.

          “I want to see her and tell her--so’s to let her
          know all about it. I’ll tell it to you, and, if I
          don’t see her, print it in your paper just as I
          say--so’s she can know.”

          The little man seized his listener’s hand. He
          couldn’t talk, but he clung to the hand until his
          voice cleared, and then he said: “So she’ll know I
          was trying to live straight--so she’ll not think I
          was all wrong.”

          So here’s your husband’s story, Mrs. O’Brien, the
          story he never told you because you seemed like
          an angel to him and he was afraid of losing you.
          They’ll tie ball and chain on his feet and seat
          him in a cell for six months and then they’ll take
          the ball and chain off and let him live inside the
          walls the rest of his life. Never mind that. He
          said he didn’t care if he could only get this story
          to you, so that you wouldn’t think rotten of him,
          Mrs. O’Brien.

          “If I could only see her for a minute,” he
          murmured, and then he went on as he had promised.

          “I was a kid,” he said, “about 17, and I had a
          good home. But I fell in with a lot of fellows who
          weren’t any good. And one of them--Larsen--planned
          to hold up somebody. He got me to get a gun for him
          and we both went out. The gun was half cocked and
          it went off in the holdup and the man was killed.
          I was standing away at the time. I was a kid. They
          sent us both up for life. That was in 1901. And I
          lived in the prison until July. D’ye understand?
          Every day was the same, every night was the same,
          and I lived in the prison for fourteen years. D’ye
          understand? And they made me an honor convict.”

          The little man laughed.

          “I saw fellas come for worse things than I’d
          done--regular criminals--and get out, pardoned. And
          they’d come back again--and get out. And I lived
          in the prison. Fourteen years. All the time I was
          young. Every day was the same. And I dreamed of
          gettin’ out. But they wouldn’t pardon me. I never
          knew any politicians. I was only a kid when they
          sent me up.

          “And every night was the same. Good God. I wanted
          to get out. I wanted to live. I knew I was
          straight. There was nothing wrong with me. I was
          only a kid when it happened. And I learned in the
          prison. It was fourteen years.”

          The little man’s face was shaking and his hands
          trembled as if they were on fine springs.

          “So one day I walked out. I was an honor convict.
          I broke my pledge. But I knew, I knew I could be
          straight. And I wanted to live. Every day was the
          same down there. Tell her that,” said the little
          man. “You can write it better’n I can talk it. But
          get it to her--I was only a kid when they sent
          me up--and every day was the same and I wanted
          to live. Then I got out. I went to Lakeside and
          boarded. My brother knew, but didn’t tell. He gave
          me a chance. I got a job. They didn’t ask me for
          references. It was with the American Motor Machine
          Company. The fella looked at me and hired me. I
          worked. They raised my pay after I’d been there a
          month. I was livin’ straight.

          “And then I met Sarah Wilson. She worked in the
          office. I used to dream of women--of some one like
          her--and she liked me, even though I am a little
          fella. Aw say, she was an angel. If I could only
          see her for a minute--to tell her.”

          The little man was shaking all over.

          “We got married four days ago,” he went on, “and I
          had it all planned. Nobody was goin’ to know about
          me bein’ a lifer. I was goin’ to forget it myself.
          Say, I was happy.”

          A rare smile came into the little man’s face.

          “Say, I had a home--a home.”

          The smile changed and he laughed in a peculiar way.
          He laughed until Lockup Keeper O’Malley looked up
          and said: “Cut it out!” And then he went on talking.

          “I had it all planned--every bit. I was a good
          worker, had a job in the stockroom. I was going
          to live with her. Last night she called me out of
          the kitchen. I was fixing the sink. I came out all
          smiling. I liked company and she said there was
          someone to see me.

          “I came out. God. I’ll never forget. I came out in
          my slippers--say, they were waitin’ at the door,
          six of them. And they took me away. They didn’t let
          me talk to her. They took me away and I won’t see
          her again--if she don’t hurry up and come. They’ll
          take me down this morning. But I don’t care if
          you’ll print this story--say, I don’t care. I’m
          used to it. Only get it over to her--God--and I’ll
          pray for you.”

          “George O’Brien!” called a voice down the stairway.
          “He’s here,” said Lockup Keeper O’Malley. Two men,
          one of them the parole agent, came walking down
          the steps. “They’re takin’ me back,” whispered the
          little man. The two men walked over to him. One of
          them dangled a pair of handcuffs.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUICIDE OR ACCIDENT

          _New York Mail_

          With gas pouring from an open jet in a bathroom
          adjoining his sleeping room, Frederick H. Herman,
          the indicted ex-president of the Universal Reserve
          Life Insurance Company, was found dead in his bed
          to-day at his home, 851 East Seventy-eighth street.

          He drew his last breath just as his family entered
          the room.

          Members of Mr. Herman’s family scouted the theory
          of suicide, declaring that his death was purely the
          result of an accident. The police reported the case
          as a “supposed suicide from gas poisoning.”

          Coroner Acritelli, after making an examination of
          Mr. Herman’s room, said that death undoubtedly had
          been due to accidental gas asphyxiation.

          The coroner said that his physician, Dr. Weston,
          would make an examination of the body this
          afternoon, and that an inquest would be held later
          this week.

          Dr. Ralph Wilson, of 836 Madison avenue, who was
          summoned immediately, declared that the gas in the
          room was not enough to have caused death alone,
          and that Mr. Herman had died from a combination of
          heart trouble and gas inhalation.

          Mr. Herman, said Dr. Wilson, also had been a
          sufferer from diabetes, and in his weakened
          condition was not so able to resist the influence
          of the gas as a man in normal health.

          The discovery was made by Mrs. Herman at 5.30 a. m.
          She slept in a room alongside that of her husband.
          On awaking she smelled gas and went to Mr. Herman’s
          room to investigate.

          Adjoining the bedroom is a bathroom, the door of
          which was open. The gas was coming from that room.

          Mrs. Herman hurriedly summoned the butler, who went
          into the bathroom and found that the valve of a
          pipe leading to a small gas heater was open. This
          he shut off.

          Dr. Wilson was telephoned for, but before he
          arrived Mr. Herman was dead. Two or three minutes
          after Mrs. Herman entered her husband’s room his
          son, Frederick R., went there in response to his
          mother’s call. He found his father propped up in
          his bed just breathing. At the elder Herman’s side
          lay an opened magazine and his eyeglasses.

          Windows were thrown open and an attempt made to
          revive Mr. Herman but it was unsuccessful.

          The gas was carried to the heater by a pipe that
          led from the wall. There were two valves on the
          pipe, one near the wall and the other near the
          heater.

          The family declares that the lower valve had been
          turned off, but that the one at the wall was on
          full and in some way the gas had succeeded in
          escaping.

          John L. O’Brien, the personal counsel for
          Frederick H. Herman, was notified of his client’s
          death and arrived at the house shortly after. Mr.
          O’Brien saw reporters who called at the house,
          explaining that members of the family did not care
          to be interviewed.

          Mr. O’Brien denied that Mr. Herman committed
          suicide. He said that the circumstances surrounding
          his death made it appear that it had been
          accidental.

          “Mr. Herman’s death was purely accidental; of that
          I am convinced,” said Mr. O’Brien. “He was not
          worried by the civil litigation in which he was
          engaged with the receivers of the Universal Reserve
          Life Insurance Company, and he long ago became
          satisfied that he would never be brought to trial
          for the criminal indictment that was hanging over
          his head in connection with the alleged misuse of
          money to influence legislation at Albany.

          “If it had been Mr. Herman’s plan to take his life
          by gas he would have gone about it differently.
          The gas in his own room was turned off, and it is
          reasonable to assume that if he had had suicide in
          mind he would have turned on the gas in his room.

          “He was fully twenty feet away from the gas heater
          in the bathroom and there was a constant current of
          air flowing between the two rooms.

          “There was some trouble with the furnace, and Mr.
          Herman, who likes his room warm, had turned on the
          gas in the bathroom. Air was coming from the open
          furnace register.

          “It is evident that Mr. Herman had been reading,
          had gone into the bathroom and turned off the valve
          near the heater, had then returned to bed, read a
          while, and finally turned out his own gas.

          “He went to bed at 11.30, and must have remained up
          reading through the night.

          “I had never seen Mr Herman more optimistic than
          he was in the last few weeks. He had been busily
          engaged with me in preparing for litigation in
          connection with the Universal Reserve Company
          affairs. He had no financial troubles that I know
          of. His family life was most peaceful and happy.”

          Mr. Herman’s bedroom was on the second floor,
          directly over the parlor. Other members of his
          family slept on the same floor and the servants on
          the floor above.

          Mr. Herman’s son, Frederick R., his daughter-in-law,
          Ethel, and the latter’s mother, Mrs. William Wilson
          of 961 Columbia Avenue, Worcester, Mass., were in
          the house. Mrs. Wilson had come to New York to spend
          the holidays with her daughter and son-in-law.

          Dr. Wilson, on being questioned by reporters, said:

          “The case appeared to be purely accidental. The
          gas was escaping from the stove, and from all
          appearances, after Mr. Herman had turned off the
          gas, he accidentally turned it on again. Mr. Herman
          had a weak heart, and the gas undoubtedly affected
          him more quickly than it would a person with a
          stronger heart.”

          Dr. Wilson said that shortly before 6 a. m. he
          called up the coroner’s office to report the death,
          and a clerk there told him to notify the police.
          This was done, according to the physician, and
          a policeman from the East Sixty-seventh street
          station arrived at the house.

          An ambulance was also sent to the residence,
          although, according to Dr. Wilson, he had told the
          police that he was a physician and that Mr. Herman
          had been dead for some time.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE.--_The different points of view from which the
          same facts may be told in news stories are very
          well shown in the two following examples._

          SUICIDE

          (1)

          _New York World_

          Facing starvation, Victor Schwartz and his wife,
          Louise, a respectable old Swiss couple, committed
          suicide yesterday by inhaling illuminating gas
          in their rooms back of a small confectionery and
          stationery store, which they carried on at No. 85
          Arnold street, Williamsburg.

          Each was sixty-seven years old. They had made
          careful preparations for their deaths. Every hole
          and crevice in their sparsely furnished rooms had
          been plugged with paper and rags, and in several
          places tacks had been driven into the woodwork to
          make sure that neither the rags nor paper would
          become dislodged. It was this hammering on Sunday
          night which caused neighbors to wonder what the old
          couple were doing, as they always retired before 10
          o’clock.

          When the Schwartzes rented the store and two rooms
          back of it eight months ago for $12 a month, they
          told neighbors that three years before their only
          child, a daughter of thirty-one years, had died.
          They said they had never recovered from the shock.

          Business during the summer had been very poor, and
          of late Schwartz and his wife had a hard struggle
          to get along. The woman frequently told neighbors
          that she believed their misfortune would soon end.
          On Sunday evening Schwartz and his wife distributed
          much of their stock in the store to the children
          in the neighborhood. It is evident that they had
          decided on suicide.

          Mrs. Rose Black, who has a grocery adjoining the
          Schwartz store, and Mrs. Kate Weck, a second floor
          tenant, heard the couple hammering in their rooms
          up to midnight Sunday, and yesterday at daybreak
          the two women were the first to detect the odor
          of illuminating gas from the Schwartz apartments.
          Policeman McCaffrey, of the Hamburg avenue station,
          was called in and, forcing an entrance, found
          Schwartz sitting dead in a chair in the kitchen,
          fully dressed. He had one end of a rubber tube in
          his mouth, the other end of which was fixed to an
          open gas burner. The woman lay dead on her bed in
          a night dress with a rubber tube in her mouth,
          fastened to another open gas burner. Ambulance
          Surgeon Sibbel, who came from the German Hospital,
          said the couple had been dead several hours. On
          a small card was a request that Edward Black be
          telephoned for at “421 Thirty-eighth street.” A
          dime lay on the card to pay for the telephone
          message. In the room was found 67 cents. The bodies
          were removed to the Brooklyn Morgue.

          (2)

          _New York Times_

          “Auntie Schwartz” was the way in which Mrs. Louise
          Schwartz soon came to be known to the children of
          the neighborhood when she and her husband, Victor,
          each of them 67 years old, opened a small candy and
          stationery store at 85 Arnold Street, Williamsburg,
          about eight months ago.

          Her small customers just kept the business going
          in the little shop, but it was a penny business,
          and when the rent of the store was raised recently
          from $12 to $15 a month, “Auntie” Schwartz almost
          despaired of continuing to make a living. Her face
          grew sad and careworn, and one day, when one of
          her little customers was grieving over the loss
          of a pet doll which a dog had chewed up, “Auntie”
          Schwartz did not console her with a cheerful word
          and a chocolate drop or two, as she was wont to
          do. Instead she took her on her lap and told of
          the little girl she had lost three years ago. She
          did not explain that her “little girl” had been
          31 years old, and that she had helped greatly in
          making a living for the old folks, who were now
          staggering under the burden of age, increased rent,
          and a precarious trade. The old people seemed
          always oppressed by the sadness of the loss of
          their only child.

          Day by day recently the children noticed that
          “Auntie” Schwartz was less cheerful that usual.
          Their elders seldom visited the little store, and
          so none who might have helped knew that old Victor
          Schwartz and his wife were almost starving to
          death, or that the old couple were slowly making up
          their minds to end their troubles together.

          So it was that the children were the first to
          discover yesterday that the little store was not
          open for business when they passed it on their way
          to their first day at school, and “Auntie” Schwartz
          lost many pennies which her small customers had
          intended to expend for lead pencils and erasers.
          “Auntie” Schwartz had called them all in on Sunday
          evening and had distributed among them all her
          small stock of candy, telling them that she would
          have a full new stock for the beginning of school.

          Meantime, Mrs. Kate Weck and Mrs. Rose Black, who
          live above the store, were puzzled by the odor of
          gas which permeated their apartments. At last the
          women traced it to the store, which they found
          closed and locked. The gas came from the two living
          rooms which the Schwartzes occupied behind their
          store, and Mrs. Weck and Mrs. Black finally got
          Policeman McCaffrey of the Hamburg Avenue Station
          to smash down the door.

          The policeman and the women found the old man
          seated in a chair in the kitchen, a gas tube
          clutched between his teeth, the other end of which
          was made fast to a gas jet. He was dead. In the
          little bedroom they found also the body of Mrs.
          Schwartz dead like her husband from the gas which
          she had inhaled. Like him, too, she had tied the
          tube around her head, so that it should not slip
          from her mouth.

          A search of the rooms showed that the old couple
          had been in the most abject poverty. Only 67 cents
          was found in the flat.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUICIDE

          _Milwaukee Sentinel_

          CHICAGO, Ill., March 3.--Emma Johnson died on
          Monday. She was the grave faced little seamstress
          from La Crosse, Wis., who used to sit every day
          near a dingy window at 42 Wilson avenue, plying
          her needle in silence, wearing an expression like
          that of a nun. And every one said she “looked so
          peaceful.”

          But the coroner’s jury found that the little woman,
          in whom no one would have suspected deep emotion,
          had been tempestuously in love, that she had not
          been able to win the man she wanted, and that she
          had sat there at her seams, “praying for strength
          to wait for a natural death.” She did not want to
          kill herself. But she did.

          She went to the home of Mrs. Jennie Nelson, 4212
          North avenue. Mrs. Nelson’s brother, William
          Larson, is the man she wanted to marry. He “was
          fond of her, too,” as Mrs. Nelson said, “but his
          health was poor and he did not want to marry for
          the present.”

          Emma Johnson turned on the gas and died. She left a
          letter, in which she said:

          “Dearest Friends--When you have read this I have
          crossed the bar. Ambition, energy and strength have
          deserted me and every hope and dream is shattered.
          Death is the only relief. I have called upon heaven
          to save me from myself--to send me a natural death.
          I don’t want to die like this. I want to live and
          be happy, but that is not to be.

          “I’ve had my hell here, but it is hard to go like
          this, hard to bring this sorrow upon my folks,
          bitterly hard.

          “For the one who has driven me to do this I feel
          only love, and if I am permitted to enter heaven I
          shall wait for him.

          “Perhaps he will love me then; he will feel bad
          about this, but help him understand that I forgive
          all, and I hope some one else will be to him what I
          never could, a joy and a comfort, and that she may
          make him happy as I had hoped to do. I wish I could
          look upon the faces of my dear father and brothers
          and sisters again. I can’t still the voice in my
          heart. I haven’t the strength. Forgive me and pray
          for me. Only another lost soul.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUICIDE OF SCHOOL GIRL

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Rose Lubin’s younger brother, Max, wanted help
          with his “home work” last night. Rose, who is 16,
          is proud of her standing at the head of the eighth
          grade in the Winfield school.

          “I can’t do my own work and yours, too,” she told
          Max. “I’ve got enough to keep me busy till bed time
          and I’m not going to lose my marks on your account.”

          Max went to his father and the father went to Rose.

          “If you don’t help your brother I’ll take you out
          of school,” said Lubin.

          Whereupon Rose changed her mind about the manner in
          which the nickel she had earned in the afternoon
          was to be spent. She bought acid with it, returned
          to her home at 951 West Fifteenth street, and drank
          the poison.

          Rose will not be at school today. Perhaps she will
          never go back. She is in the county hospital.
          Physicians there fear she will not recover.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CAUSE OF ATTEMPTED SUICIDE

          _New York Evening Post_

          Mary Stober, eighteen years old, of 951 East
          135th Street, who tried to kill herself last week
          (Friday) because she has no piano, is home again
          from the Lincoln Hospital, and is starting in to
          live again in a world where no hope is, since she
          cannot have a piano.

          To dream every night that you have a piano and
          “play just grand,” and then wake up to hear the
          alarm clock buzzing six o’clock; to forget where
          you are, and half close your eyes and pretend
          that the movements your fingers are making are on
          a piano, instead of having something to do with
          the bobbin of a machine in an embroidery factory;
          to hear beautiful music suddenly in the midst of
          your work, and listen, startled and ecstatic, for
          a moment until it is lost in the endless whirring
          of the machines--these things, if you have never
          done them, may seem a certainty that Life is, after
          all, very splendid while there is such a thing as
          imagination, and that the gray of it is woven full
          of unexpected and vivid threads of color.

          Or it may impress you as deliciously funny that the
          lack of a piano can seem tragic, if you have a big
          enough view of tragic things to see that some of
          them are greater. But to this girl, who does them
          every day and night of her life, they are simply
          the things which have twice made her try to kill
          herself, the reason why she is “disgusted, always
          disgusted,” as she says, very simply.

          Mary Stober has a pale, strong face, with a
          stubborn chin and a wistful smile, very gray eyes,
          light brown hair in a bang on her forehead, and
          very red lips. She looks very young and very
          determined and very wistful and somewhat sullen.
          Her hands are red and rough and square-fingered
          from hard work.

          She was dusting one of the rooms this morning in
          the soggy apartment house of which her mother
          is janitress, and where they and the six other
          children live and pay half-rent. She goes back to
          the factory on Monday. She sat down in one of the
          innumerous chairs to tell her story, fingering
          the grimy dust-cloth with her red fingers, which
          are never quiet for a minute. Her mother stood up
          through the recital--the little German mother who
          speaks English only brokenly, who wears a little
          shawl over her head while she sweeps down the long
          flights of stairs and who used to play the piano
          herself when she was a girl in Germany--and looked
          at Mary with a worried, gentle, almost heartbroken
          look.

          “When I was ten--that was when I stopped school and
          went to work--I thought always about when I would
          be eighteen and a grand piano player,” Mary began,
          fingering the dust-cloth. “Then I was eighteen
          and I didn’t have a piano yet, and I was almost
          crazy. Eight years I have worked, and I haven’t got
          anything yet. And what’s worrying me now is where
          we’re going to go. We can’t stay here. Other places
          we’ve been we’ve had coal and things, and our money
          could all go for the food and clothes. But now
          we’ve got to pay for a stove and coal.”

          She and her sister, who is nineteen and who can
          play the piano by ear when she can find one to
          play--Mary herself can only play with one hand by
          ear, and “people don’t like to hear that kind o’
          playing,” she says--and the oldest brother, are the
          only ones who make money. Mary makes seven dollars
          a week. All of these details, which she tells
          simply, go to show that there is little hope for
          a piano. The little, crumpled mother from behind
          the chair she is leaning on says, in her broken
          way, that a piano is not so easy to get, and looks
          hopelessly at her daughter.

          “Then we got phonograph, but she only cry every
          time he play,” the mother said.

          “I can’t bear to hear it,” interrupted Mary. “I’d
          rather play myself.”

          And so finally the brother took the phonograph
          away, about a month ago, since it only made the
          girl more miserable than ever.

          “And in every house I go to,” she said, “there is
          a piano. And one girl comes to the factory, saying
          she can play grand, and her father wants her to
          play in a cabaret. She’s only sixteen, too. I can’t
          be happy,” she finished simply. “I can’t be happy.
          And it gets my goat when anybody laughs. And every
          single night I dream I’ve got a piano and play so
          nice, and every day at work I imagine I am playing.
          All I want to do is to play a piano. I don’t want
          clothes. If I have good clothes the girls would
          want me to go out with them, and I don’t want to go
          out. It is only trouble comes of it. All I want to
          do is to stay home and play the piano.”

          All the family like music, it seems, “but none of
          them but me would die for it,” she says. “And my
          father hated it. He wanted me only to work, day
          and night to work, since I was ten. But he’s gone
          away now. They took him away--Randall’s Island.” It
          was when the father was home, though, and earning
          a little now and then, that the phonograph, which
          proved a doubtful blessing, was made possible.

          Mary Stober says, and her chin looks very square,
          that she knows she could pay for lessons--she
          would walk to the factory instead of riding and go
          without lunch--if she only had a piano to practice
          on at home.

          It was a mixture of lysol and iodine that she took
          last week--the only things she could find. “I don’t
          care what I take,” she says, “if I can’t get what I
          want. Eight years I’ve worked and I haven’t gotten
          anything yet.” It was last August that she tried
          before to kill herself.




CHAPTER V

CRIMINAL AND CIVIL COURTS


=Type of story.= As all forms of judicial procedure are included
under court news, stories of this class cover such matters as police
court news, criminal trials, civil suits, divorce suits, bankruptcy,
wills and other probate court matters, decisions of higher courts,
and findings of judicial officers. Since much court news is of a
routine character, the matter-of-fact informative news story is a
frequent medium for presenting it. This does not imply that such news
is necessarily dry and uninteresting, for by bringing out salient and
significant phases of such matters as decisions of higher courts, legal
documents, wills, and bankruptcy cases, as well as of criminal and
civil suits, the facts of the news can be made of interest even to the
casual reader (cf. “Supreme Court Decision,” p. 88, and “Opinion of
Attorney General,” p. 90). Criminal and civil cases often have a strong
human interest element that, if rightly developed, may be a valuable
part of the story (cf. “Criminal Court,” p. 83, and “Supreme Court
Decision,” p. 89). The little comedies and tragedies of the police
court have long been favorite subjects for entertaining and appealing
human interest stories (cf. “Municipal Court,” p. 78, and “Forgery
Case,” p. 78).

=Purpose.= To give fair and accurate publicity to significant
phases of the administration of justice is the obvious reason for the
publication of court news. Court proceedings, like those of legislative
bodies, are activities of important branches of government and hence
are matters of public concern. In reporting sessions of these bodies,
the writer’s aim should be to direct the reader’s attention to those
details of the proceedings (1) that are significant to him personally,
(2) that affect the interests of the community, and (3) that relate to
the welfare of society as a whole.

The wide-spread publicity given by newspapers to the punishment
inflicted on wrong-doers tends to deter others from similar illegal
acts, and thus aids in accomplishing the chief object of punishment.
“The wages of sin is publicity,” as one editor has expressed it. What
has been said of the value of constructive stories of crime applies
with equal force to stories of criminal trials.

Destructive, or anti-social, influences, opposed to the best interests
of organized society, are found in those court stories--particularly
those of criminal and divorce cases--that play up disgusting or
scandalous phases of such trials in order to gratify the morbid taste
of some of their readers. Another evil connected with the newspaper’s
treatment of court news is the so-called “trying the case in the
newspaper” by means of news stories and editorials published before
or during a trial. Some newspapers undertake to prove the innocence
or the guilt of an accused person by printing whatever evidence they
can secure, even though some of it would be excluded from the trial
under the rules of evidence. In this way they create public opinion
and arouse public feeling to such an extent as to prevent the accused
person’s having the fair trial to which he is entitled.

=Treatment of material.= To find matters of general significance
and interest, particularly when they are buried in legal technicalities
and verbiage, and to present them clearly and attractively without
sacrificing accuracy, are the main problems in handling court news. The
task is not an easy one, but it is worth doing well, for court news,
if well treated, can be made interesting and significant even to the
casual reader.

The body of court news stories usually consists of summaries of
arguments, decisions, testimony, or legal documents, or of excerpts
from them, with the necessary connective material. In some instances
the story is largely a history of the case or action and of the persons
involved. The lead is usually determined by the status of the case. Any
one of the important points may be made the feature.

Testimony in news stories is given in one of three forms: (1) the
question indicated by “Q” and the answer by “A,” both question and
answer given in one paragraph without quotation marks, (2) the question
and the answer in quotation marks, each followed by the necessary
explanatory matter and each in a separate paragraph, like verbatim
conversation in fiction, (3) a summary of the testimony of each witness
in indirect quotation form, with the name of the witness at or near the
beginning of the first sentence of the summarized testimony.

=Contents of story.= Because of the variety of material presented
by different kinds of court news, it is difficult to indicate
specifically the points to be considered in each story. Among the
important details, however, are (1) the verdict and the conditions
under which it was rendered, (2) the sentence imposed, (3) the decision
rendered and its significance, (4) important testimony, (5) net results
of the day’s proceedings in a trial, (6) the history of the case or
action, (7) provisions of a will, (8) liabilities, assets, and cause in
bankruptcy, (9) the award, or finding, (10) the grounds on which a suit
is based.

          *       *       *       *       *

          POLICE COURT CASE

          _Savannah News_

          If you own an automobile and are fond of joy rides
          in the evening, it will be a good idea to keep your
          weather eye on the gasolene tank, for none will be
          filled in Savannah after sundown if the efforts of
          the fire department are successful.

          Chief John H. Monroe is seeking to have enforced
          the ordinance prohibiting the handling of gasolene
          after sundown, believing it will reduce the fire
          hazard.

          Every city has a number of laws that are forgotten
          because they are seldom enforced. This is true of
          the gasolene ordinance here. It was not generally
          known that such a law was on the statute books
          until Barney Kolman was arraigned in the Police
          Court yesterday, charged with violating it by
          selling fuel to a motorist at night. He was fined
          $10 or thirty days in jail by Judge John E. Schwarz
          and the fine was remitted.

          “No gasolene shall be handled in any way for
          charging or filling any tank or repository by
          artificial light, and never at all after sundown,”
          reads the ordinance, passed in 1906. A fine of
          not more than $100 and imprisonment not exceeding
          thirty days, either or both, is provided.

          “It is dangerous to handle such a fire producer
          as gasolene after sundown because people become
          careless and in many cases use open torches,
          candles or matches, to get enough light to see
          what they are doing,” said the fire chief. “Such
          carelessness leads to increased danger from
          gasolene explosions.”

          It was because of efforts of the fire department to
          stop violations of the law, which, it is said, have
          become common, that Kolman, whose place of business
          is at No. 435 West Bond street, was docketed.

          The ordinance was passed April 13, 1904, and
          amended Oct. 10, 1906, and August 14, 1907.

          Recorder Schwarz remarked, in hearing the case
          against Kolman, that he had never heard of the
          ordinance, and that if it did exist he had seen it
          violated a number of times.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MUNICIPAL COURT

          _Kansas City Star_

          Down Main Street drove Carl Wilson, 1228 Jenifer
          Street, yesterday on the seat of an undertaker’s
          ambulance, blowing on his fingers to warm them.
          Presently he saw a familiar figure on the sidewalk.
          It was Gus Hart, 2231A Holton Street.

          “Hey, Gus,” he called. “Come on and take a ride.”

          Gus climbed to the seat beside Wilson and smiled
          expansively.

          “Fine day, ain’t it?” said he.

          “Yes, it ain’t,” said Carl. “I’m cold through and
          through.”

          “Oh, this is real weather,” said Gus.

          “How can any man like this?” said Carl angrily.
          “You must be crazy.”

          “Crazy yourself,” said Gus.

          “Bing!” said Carl’s fist.

          “Crack!” said Gus’s chin.

          Then they fought on the seat of the undertaker’s
          ambulance, while the horse took the opportunity to
          snatch a few moments of rest.

          Both were taken into the South Side Municipal Court
          this morning. Carl looked at Gus and Gus at Carl.

          “Say, judge,” said Carl. “We’re friends. But even
          friends fall out about the weather. Let us off,
          will you?”

          Acting Judge Casimir J. Welch let ’em off.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FORGERY CASE

          _Milwaukee Sentinel_

          With his young wife clasping him in her arms and
          sobbing bitterly, Louis Short stood with hanging
          head in District court on Friday, heard himself
          branded as a forger, and in a shaking voice told
          how he had forged the check because his baby had
          died and he had no money to bury the little body.

          A hush fell over the courtroom at the sight of
          the young couple standing in the prisoners’ dock,
          crushed and broken after the bitter, losing fight
          against poverty and temptation. They have been
          married but two years and were happy in their
          little home in Chicago until the boy husband lost
          his job.

          Misfortunes crowded upon them after that. They
          became driftwood on the sea of life, washed hither
          and thither and finally cast upon Milwaukee. Then
          the baby died. It was the last blow, and nagging
          temptation won its victory.

          Short forged a check for $48 on the German-American
          bank. He made it out to Louis Short, signed the
          name “J. Seikler, president,” and passed it in Mrs.
          Mary Moore’s saloon, 251 Herst avenue, on July 28.
          With the money the baby was buried. Then came the
          law and Short’s arrest.

          Short pleaded guilty, admitted everything, and
          tried to be brave. So did his girl wife, but the
          strain was too much. She broke down, threw her arms
          around his neck and hid her face on his shoulder.

          “O, Louis, Louis!” she sobbed.

          Judge Neelen adjourned the case one week, for there
          is a possibility that Short’s father will send him
          the money to pay Mrs. Moore back.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHILDREN’S COURT

          _New York Evening Sun_

          There was a soft patter on the floor of the
          Children’s Court this morning, and in through the
          gates, swung open for them by a tall policeman,
          advanced two little maids, eyes cast down, doll
          feet taking quick, small steps. Justice Wyatt
          brushed aside the dry legal documents before him
          and looked down from the bench with more interest
          than he had displayed all the morning. The benchers
          craned their necks and the court officers were
          all eyes. Here was something out of the usual
          routine--two little Chinese maids. Somehow they
          didn’t fit into the picture of juvenile offenders,
          mothers from the tenements full of cares and
          burdened with babies, the motley array of parents,
          complainants, street arabs and heavyfooted
          guardians of the law. On the Yang-Tse-Kiang,
          perhaps, the little maids would have fallen into
          harmony with their surroundings, but not in the
          hurly-burly of an Occidental court room. Who were
          they and what was the occasion of their coming?

          An agent of the Children’s Society explained. He
          was Obadiah Cunningham. The almond-eyed visitors
          were the Misses Moy You Toy and Chin Fung Toy, who
          had strayed beyond the boundaries of the three
          crooked streets which mark the limits of the local
          Chinatown. For two moons the quarter had been
          upset. The joss gave no comfort when his aid was
          sought and one night threw the luck sticks into
          the air in his temple ever so many times; but no
          matter if they came down with the wished for side
          uppermost, not a word came from beyond the pale,
          out of the wide spreading territory of the “white
          devils,” about either Moy You Toy or Chin Fung
          Toy--that is, not until this morning, when the
          lost were found again and taken to the Children’s
          Court. Then the Chinese women--the men do not care
          so much about the disappearance of a girl as of a
          boy--could once more eat with a relish their dried
          fish, and duck eggs dug from the soil of their
          native land, in which they had remained packed
          until the day of consumption.

          Chin Fung Toy and Moy You Toy, the first named 13,
          and the other 14 years old, trembled much in the
          presence of the austere figure on the high seat,
          who they had no doubt was a ruler of mighty power;
          but he spoke kindly to them and they saw that it
          was not his intention either to eat them or cast
          them into a dark dungeon. Still, though his voice
          was gentle, they longed somehow to be at home again
          at 30 and 34 Mott street, respectively, to look
          upon their own people and hear their own tongue
          spoken.

          It was not to be--not at once, anyhow. The
          agent who had charge of them submitted a paper
          to the Magistrate, in which was contained the
          information in terse, legal phraseology that
          there was no proper guardianship for the two
          maids, and Justice Wyatt committed them to the
          care of the Society, setting the case down for an
          examination next Wednesday. It was represented to
          the Court that there was reason to believe that
          their so-called parents were not their parents at
          all. Superintendent Jenkins of the Gerry Society
          promised to say something about that phase of the
          question later. In the meanwhile Moy You Toy and
          Chin Fung Toy will look on the world through the
          windows of the Society’s building at Twenty-third
          street and Fourth avenue, and not from the closely
          shuttered blinds of Mott street.

          How were Chin Fung Toy and Moy You Toy found? That
          is another story, which has not been told yet; but
          there are hints of interesting developments to
          follow before the wanderings of the children of
          Mott street become known.

          The statements issued from the offices of the
          Gerry Society this afternoon, statements made
          by the little girls through an interpreter,
          put an entirely different complexion on their
          disappearance and made it appear that they had been
          little white slaves in Mott street. They were both
          sold like common chattels in China, they said,
          and in the quarter they got more kicks and blows
          than kindness. For instance, Moy You Toy, after
          stating that she is 14 years old, according to
          our reckoning, and 15 years old according to the
          Chinese, giving the place of her nativity as Sung
          Hing district, Moy-how city, said:

          “My address has been 34 Mott street, Room 11.
          My father died when I was very young, and my
          mother married again and left me alone with my
          grandmother, who was very, very poor. I was sold to
          the wife of Moy See Chai, who brought me over here
          to America about two years ago, and I have been
          with her ever since.

          “I have had to work very hard in the house, making
          buttons and button loops from early morning until
          late at night. When I take a rest I get scolded and
          beaten. Whenever my mistress’s boy called to me to
          do certain things, and when I was not able to do
          them fast enough, the boy would beat me.

          “I do not want to say anything that is not true
          against them; they fed me well, of course, nothing
          luxurious.

          “My mistress often said to me: ‘You must be
          careful of Miss Banta [Miss Mary E. Banta,
          superintendent of a school in Chinatown]; you can’t
          depend upon her all the time, and complain to her
          and display your feelings’ (meaning by this that I
          should not make any complaints to Miss Banta).”

          The girl continued that her mistress had even said
          to her, “If I killed you they could only arrest
          me.” Once, she added, she got a terrible beating
          because she had gone to the country with Miss Banta.

          Chin Fung Toy or Choy said that there was a man
          named Ing Yee Yue of Washington, D. C., who has a
          son and wife in China, and that Fung Choy was sold
          to his son.

          “I was sold to his son and was brought to America
          by Pang Sam,” she continued. “Pang Sam was a friend
          of Ing’s. I was told that the price the son paid
          for me was $160.

          “I came from a village in China, but don’t know
          its name. About eight or nine months ago Ing Yee
          Yue said he was going back to China and was not
          able to keep me any longer; he then brought me to
          New York and sold me to Chin Hing for $500 gold. I
          have been with Chin Hing ever since, about eight
          or nine months. I have had to work in the family
          all the time, making buttons and button loops for
          stores. Some mornings I had to get up at 7 o’clock
          and sometimes work right on until 2 o’clock in the
          morning. I was not allowed to go out.

          “If I didn’t work all the time I got beaten,
          although I am told I was treated much better than
          the former slave girls. The other two were married.
          One is here in New York yet and the other has gone
          down South. I had to do all the washing--sheets and
          all. The only teaching I ever received was from
          Miss Banta, who taught me for an hour or so every
          Monday.”

          Fung Choy did not want to go back to Mott street,
          after all, she told the Gerry agents, no matter how
          downcast she may have seemed in court. She would
          rather die than be sent back to Mott street, she
          declared.

          She won’t be.

          *       *       *       *       *

          RUNAWAY BOY IN COURT

          _New York World_

          Morris Steiner is a bad boy and Morris Steiner is
          a good boy, and whichever he is most Magistrate
          Naumer in the Flatbush Court, Brooklyn, must soon
          decide.

          Morris, now in Raymond Street Jail, says he will
          not live with his stepmother. He braved hunger and
          privation because of this idea. He built himself
          a hut, lived a queer gypsy life for weeks, cooked
          his own meals and slept in his queer camp. He did
          his own washing and cooking. And, curious boy that
          he is, he did his own praying, which was that his
          own mother would forgive him for running away,
          and would come to him as he slept and kiss his
          forehead. That, he says, was the prayer he made in
          his hut.

          Morris, who is sixteen years old, could never
          get along with his stepmother. He has a brother
          eighteen years old and another fourteen, and they
          live on good terms with their stepmother. It was
          nine years ago that the brisk little woman married
          Aaron Steiner, a travelling salesman. He was a
          widower with four children.

          The Steiners have not only a comfortable but a
          pretty home at No. 991 Sixtieth street, Brooklyn.
          It possesses shade trees and carefully trimmed
          hedges and a beflowered piazza. Mrs. Steiner said
          to a World reporter there yesterday:

          “Such a queer boy! This home is not for him. He
          will not have it because I am his stepmother. From
          the time he was seven years old he would hardly
          speak to his father, because I had come to the
          home. My other stepchildren love me. But he will
          not. I could not pet him. He would shrink from me.
          Or he would laugh. I thought all the time that when
          he got older it would be all right. But it was not.
          The older he got the less he would think of this as
          his home. He would always run away.”

          This habit of the boy brought him into the Flatbush
          Court yesterday on a charge of being incorrigible.

          When the boy disappeared the last time he made his
          way to a spot about half a mile from his home. It
          is in a garden overgrown with rank weeds back of
          an abandoned carpenter shop. The lot is at New York
          and Thirteenth avenues, Brooklyn.

          The boy built a house of old planks, nailed
          together with a carpenter-like proficiency. Inside
          he constructed for himself a couch and a fireplace
          with a chimney outlet; on a peg on the wall hung
          a stiff whisk-broom with which the earthen floor
          might be kept smooth.

          The youngster also put up pegs on which he hung
          an extra suit of clothes. He was not without
          an artistic sense, for he nailed to the walls
          cartoons and other newspaper drawings, the most
          prominent one being that of President Taft, with a
          background portraying the reception on the return
          of the ex-President and the lonely Taft exclaiming:
          “Nobody loves a fat man.” The boy was evidently in
          sympathy with the loneliness of the fat man.

          For six weeks the youngster made his home in this
          hut. Scraps of dry bread were the only signs of
          food in the place when he was arrested. But word
          was sent him that one of his little stepsisters,
          of whom he was very fond, had been awake all night
          crying for his return. When he heard that he went
          back home. It was true about the little girl crying
          for him. But also, when he got back his father
          handed him a summons to appear in the Flatbush
          Police Court. At that the boy flew into a rage.
          He tore the summons to bits and flung them at his
          father. His father thereupon caused his arrest.

          In court yesterday the youngster stolidly looked at
          his stepmother. He frowned at his father.

          “Do you know,” demanded the father, “that you are
          arrested?”

          “I don’t care,” said the boy.

          “Don’t you see what a trouble you are?” insisted
          his parent.

          The boy for answer turned to the Judge.

          “I can’t live with my stepmother,” he said. “I
          don’t do anything wrong. I don’t want to. But I get
          along by myself. I’ve been living in my little hut,
          and I like it there all by myself, with nobody to
          get sore on me. That’s all. I wish I could only be
          left alone--that’s all.”

          His Honor, with an eye on the youthful face,
          shook his head and held the boy in $300 bail for a
          further hearing Friday morning.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CRIMINAL COURT EXAMINATION

          _Milwaukee Sentinel_

          For the first time the inner history of the daring
          theft of the Boston store’s $3,500 pay roll from
          the messenger in the First National bank on Feb. 15
          was told on Tuesday, when Joseph Wilson, awaiting
          trial for complicity, turned state’s evidence
          against George O. Watts, in his preliminary
          examination in District court.

          Wilson said that Watts recruited in Chicago a
          quintet for the express purpose of “cracking a
          crib” in Milwaukee. Wilson said that the theft of
          the money-laden satchel was not premeditated, but
          that the gang had set out to “work” the banks.

          According to Wilson’s story, Chester Bangs, who is
          now awaiting trial, cleverly sneaked the satchel
          at the feet of the Boston store messenger, and the
          other four “blanketed” him while he slipped out of
          the bank.

          Watts, whom Wilson’s testimony clearly showed
          to have been an accomplice, was bound over to
          Municipal court. Bail was set at $9,000 despite
          Attorney W. H. Rubin’s plea for a lower figure.

          Wilson said that the gang was composed of Watts,
          Bangs, Oates, Carter and himself. Of these, Oates
          and Carter are still at liberty. The other three
          have been bound over for trial.

          Wilson told his story freely and fully, using
          considerable slang.

          “Two days before this deal was pulled off I had a
          talk with Watts in a saloon in Chicago; he sent me
          a note by Oates to meet him,” said Wilson. “I had
          been out of jail four days. Watts asked me to come
          in on the scheme of cracking a crib in Milwaukee
          and told me that he had three other fellows to go
          along.

          “I agreed and Watts ‘made a meet’ opposite the
          union depot in time to take the 7 o’clock train to
          Milwaukee on Feb. 15. We met there, the five of us,
          and came to Milwaukee.

          “After we left the station we stopped in for a
          drink in a small hotel at the corner of the station
          park. Watts said: ‘This’ll be a good place for a
          meet if we’re piped off.’ After that we started in
          to work the banks. We went to the First National
          twice.

          “On the second trip we piped the messenger filling
          his pay roll satchel. That was our chance. It was
          fixed that Bangs should turn the trick. We four sat
          on one of the benches near a window. In a minute
          Bangs signaled us to come up, and we did.

          “While the messenger was looking over some papers
          Bangs reached under and grabbed the satchel. Then
          we crowded around and blanketed him until he had
          gotten out of the bank. Then we went out and
          scattered. I saw Bangs, with the satchel, hop on a
          street car.

          “I walked up Wisconsin street and was later joined
          by Oates. When we got in front of the postoffice
          some one hollered. I turned around. It was Bangs.
          We joined him beside the building. He opened the
          satchel, and I saw it was filled with paper and
          silver. He kept the paper money, tied in packages,
          and loaded all the silver on me. Of course I did
          not count it, for we were right on the sidewalk.

          “That noon I caught an interurban car for Racine at
          Clinton street. Watts was on the car. He came and
          sat with me.

          “‘We come off pretty clean,’ he said. ‘There can’t
          be no “rap” to this.’ I told him it was a fool
          trick to carry so much silver as I had in my bundle.

          “The whole bunch was on the car. When the car
          stopped at a corner in Racine we all got off and
          scattered.

          “In a minute I decided that I was being trailed. I
          caught up to Oates and told him so. He told me to
          go in a saloon and find out. I did, and the fellow
          trailing me came in too. I went out of the saloon,
          saw Watts and told him I was trailed.

          “‘Ding that and duck,’ he said, pointing to my
          bundle.

          “‘Cover up and give me a chance,’ I said.

          “He did, and I ducked down a side street, but that
          fellow was still trailing me. After walking about
          a quarter mile I stepped into a cigar store, for
          I’d made up my mind to duck that fellow. I got the
          proprietor to take me out in the back yard. Then
          I climbed over two fences and hid in a shed until
          dusk.

          “Detective Sullivan nailed me about 9 o’clock that
          night.”

          On cross-examination, Wilson freely told his
          long criminal record, which includes several
          convictions. He gave his age as 53 years. He said
          that Joseph Wilson is his real name, but that he
          has used three aliases.

          Asked what his business is, Wilson said:

          “I’m a professional thief.”

          District Attorney A. C. Backus announced that he
          would file information charging Watts with a second
          offense, for which the penalty may be twenty-five
          years in prison.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CRIMINAL COURT

          _Detroit News_

          Some 20 years ago a ragged little newsboy stood
          shivering on a busy corner in the heart of St.
          Louis. His last paper was yet to be sold and his
          free hand jingled a pocketful of loose coins. A
          hurrying pedestrian snatched the final copy and
          thrust a nickel in the hand of the boy. He did not
          wait for change. Five minutes later the ragged and
          cold and hungry boy stood with his nose buried in a
          volume of “First Steps for Chemists” in the musty
          atmosphere of a second-hand book store.

          Wednesday morning the same boy, now grown to
          manhood, stood before the federal court in Detroit
          and heard a stern judge sentence him to 10 years in
          the federal prison at Leavenworth and affix a fine
          of $5,000 on three counts charging counterfeiting.
          It was the cause and the effect.

          The boy was Harry Wilson, alias Peter Smith, said
          to be one of the cleverest counterfeiters in the
          United States.

          “I loved chemistry from the time I was a boy,” said
          Wilson from his cell. “That was really my downfall.
          I was left alone in the world when I was seven
          and I sold papers for years. I do not know why
          chemistry had such a fascination, but when I was
          still in knee breeches and earning a few pennies a
          day I saved until I could buy second-hand books on
          the science. I studied at every possible moment,
          and although my English is not the best in the
          world, and I may misspell many words, I am familiar
          with the majority of chemical formulas and I can
          spell any chemical symbol, drug, instrument or
          process, Latin, Greek or German.

          “I longed for a laboratory of my own. I wanted
          enough money to enable me to give up my life to
          chemical research. To achieve this I wanted a trade
          and engraving seemed to open the doors to a good
          salary, as well as allow me to come in contact with
          chemicals. I got a position after I had taught
          myself the rudiments of the trade and discovered I
          had a talent for drawing. But the salary I received
          did not seem to be enough to allow me to obtain the
          realization of the dreams for many years.

          “One day I picked up a magazine and there was a
          story by Detective Burns on counterfeiting. I read
          it and then read several following stories. The
          idea came to me slowly, bit by bit, that here was a
          way whereby I could obtain enough to buy a private
          laboratory. If I could make bills good enough I
          thought they would continue to circulate and no
          one would lose. I tried it and I have failed.
          I am sorry, of course. I am sorry I went wrong
          from a standard of morals and more sorry from the
          standpoint of what I might possibly have done for
          the benefit of the world in chemical research.

          “Those unfortunate persons who were convicted
          because they associated with me must know how
          badly I feel over their arrest. I do not know what
          they did before they met me, but I feel personally
          responsible for this bit of trouble and I wish I
          could bear all their sentences. They would never
          have known the horrors of imprisonment but for me.
          In a way they were tools that I used and I do not
          believe any of them knew just how serious a thing
          they were getting into.

          “I shall be as good a prisoner as I know how,
          and should I be released before my sentence is
          completed or should I have to wait all the time,
          when I get out I am going into chemistry with a
          determination to give to the world more than I
          robbed it of.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          MURDER TRIAL

          _New York Sun_

          Jack Rose’s jester and the playboy of the Rosenthal
          murder, Sam Schepps, testified for six hours and a
          quarter yesterday in the trial of Lieut. Becker,
          and exhibited the qualities that made him the joy
          of the gamblers in their lighter hours.

          Murder trials are not supposed to be humorous
          affairs and Justices bend severe glances upon
          flippant witnesses, but Schepps somehow dissipated
          the gravity of the proceedings and lightened
          the black tale of crime. Even the austere Judge
          permitted his eyes to twinkle and some of the
          jurors laughed outright.

          Schepps was so pleased with himself, so proud of
          his skill in coping with John F. McIntyre, his
          inquisitor, so naive in his appeals to Justice
          Goff, so pugnacious and alert that his listeners
          were in smiles most of the time. He took it for
          granted that the court appreciated him at his own
          valuation, and Justice Goff seemed to regard him
          as an extraordinary specimen of another world, one
          that must not be banged about by counsel for fear
          of the total loss of a curiosity worth studying.

          But the amusing characteristics of the State’s
          principal corroborative witness by no means
          lessened the effect of the testimony he gave
          against Lieut. Becker. Resisting every device of
          Mr. McIntyre to trap him into admitting he was
          an accomplice with Rose, Webber and Vallon, and
          insisting that he was kept in the dark and used
          only as an errand boy by Rose and Webber, Schepps
          swore that the night after the murder he talked
          with Becker in Becker’s house and that Becker sent
          this message to Rose:

          “Don’t mind anything. I’ll fix it all right. They
          have to prove who killed Rosenthal before they can
          convict any one.”

          And Schepps added that Becker, in the darkened
          dining room of the apartment, wouldn’t let him
          smoke and said:

          “Don’t light that match. Somebody is across the
          street and if they see a light they will suspect
          something. They have been trailing me all day.”

          Schepps was an exasperating witness to Mr.
          McIntyre. He had the dimmest of memories for times
          and dates, but he had an extraordinary faculty for
          recalling previous statements, and he frequently
          corrected the lawyer. Mr. McIntyre resorted to the
          traditional methods of hectoring and storming and
          fist shaking, but Schepps hectored and stormed and
          gestured back at him. Once he called Mr. McIntyre
          a liar for saying he had paid the gunmen, and
          while Mr. McIntyre was fuming before the jury and
          shouting that Schepps was “a thing,” “a creature,”
          the witness was suavely and deferentially
          apologizing to the court for “language that a
          gentleman ought not to use.”

          Lieut. Becker’s chief counsel concentrated his
          efforts to make Schepps say something that would
          indicate that he knew Rosenthal was to be murdered
          and that he was one of the conspirators. It was an
          attack of the utmost importance to the defence. A
          good deal of Becker’s money had been spent in an
          excursion to Hot Springs, made for the purpose of
          showing that Schepps had incriminated himself while
          there and had exculpated Becker.

          Lawyer Hart, who was with Rose the night Schepps
          was with Becker, cross-examined Schepps about his
          conversations with Hot Springs people and failed
          absolutely to establish contradiction. McIntyre
          had tried his hand at this work previously, and
          had raged when Schepps volunteered the statement
          that one of the principal Hot Springs witnesses for
          the defence had been a pickpocket in New York for
          twenty years.

          Mr. McIntyre and Mr. Hart gave up the
          cross-examination late in the evening, apparently
          running out of ammunition. Mr. McIntyre insisted
          plaintively that he was wearied, totally exhausted,
          unable to continue, which drew from Justice Goff,
          who has a very dry humor, the comment:

          “Tut, tut, Mr. McIntyre. You talk of being
          exhausted. I am upward of 70 years old.”

          Schepps was the only witness yesterday. It had been
          the purpose of the prosecution to call Mrs. Herman
          Rosenthal, but there was no time left for the long
          examination that would be necessary and Justice
          Goff rather reluctantly consented to adjournment.
          The widow of the murdered gambler will be the first
          witness to-day.

          When Schepps appeared from the witness room at
          10:30 A. M. all eyes were turned in his direction.
          From the first he has been one of the most
          interesting characters of this case. His childlike
          vanity, his delight at posing as an oracle
          among the rudely informed men and women of the
          underworld, his reputation for impudence and wit,
          his adventures dodging detectives in the Catskills
          and his sojourn among admiring citizens in Hot
          Springs had given him a kind of reputation second
          only to that of Rose.

          He was nervous at first. His sharp eyes squinted
          behind his nose glasses and his glances darted
          sidewise. He twisted his fingers together and tried
          to cross his legs, a proceeding frowned upon by the
          court officer who stands at the witness chair.

          He wore a blue suit, a black four-in-hand tie and
          black low shoes, and he carefully drew up his
          sharply pressed trousers so that his white silk
          socks would be exposed.

          As the day went on he lost much of his nervousness
          and controlled his tendency to flippancy, but he
          became more and more pugnacious and more and more
          determined that counsel for the defence should not
          get the better of him.

          Assistant District Attorney Frank Moss conducted
          the direct examination. The testimony was:

          Q. Where do you live? A. Hot Springs, Arkansas.

          Q. What is your business? A. Portrait enlarger.

          Q. Do you know Jack Rose? A. Yes; I have known him
          for fifteen or eighteen years.

          Q. Did you ever meet the defendant Becker? If so,
          where? A. At the Lafayette baths.

          Q. Ever again? A. Yes, at the Sam Paul raid.

          Q. Did you ever carry to him a message from Jack
          Rose? A. Yes.

          Q. What was it? A. That Rose would meet him at the
          Union Square Hotel.

          Q. Were you at Dora Gilbert’s house on July 15? A.
          Yes.

          Q. What were you doing there? A. I was asked to go
          there by Rose to get an affidavit for Becker.

          Then he said that, after leaving Dora Gilbert’s, he
          drove with his friends to Sharkey’s, where the gray
          car was called by telephone.

          Q. Who drove it? A. William Shapiro.

          Q. Who got into that car? A. Vallon, Rose and
          myself.

          Q. What did you do then? A. We went up to Seventh
          avenue and 145th street.

          Q. What did you do next? A. I stepped out and
          pressed the bell of Baker and Harris’s apartment.
          Dago Frank put his head out of the window and we
          called him out. He got into the machine and we went
          to Forty-second street and Sixth avenue.

          Q. Who did you find there? A. Sam Paul, Leftie
          Louie, Whitey Lewis and Gyp the Blood. Webber
          excused himself and said he would be back shortly.

          Q. Did he return? A. Yes; he said Rosenthal was at
          the Metropole.

          Q. What was done then? A. They left the room.

          Q. Who left? A. Gyp, Lefty Louie, Whitey Lewis and
          Dago Frank.

          Q. What did you do? A. I stayed in the room.

          Q. How long? A. About fifteen minutes.

          Q. In what direction did you then go? A. I went
          into the Times Square drug store and purchased a
          soda. A short time after I got there I heard four
          shots.

          Q. What did you do? A. I ran in the direction of
          the shots.

          Q. Did you see Lieut. Becker that night? A. Yes,
          sir.

          Q. Where? A. He was riding in an auto with a
          chauffeur at Sixth avenue and Forty-sixth street at
          1:30 o’clock A. M.

          Q. When you ran to the scene of the murder, on what
          side of the street were you? A. On the south side.

          Q. Did you meet any one that you knew? A. I met
          Harry Vallon at the Elks Club. A great crowd had
          gathered and the body was lying in the street.

          Q. What did you and Harry Vallon do then? A. We
          went to Fourteenth street, to the house where he
          lived, and stayed there until 6 o’clock the next
          morning, when we went to a house at 145th street
          and Seventh avenue.

          Q. What was it that awoke you? A. The entrance of
          Jack Rose.

          Q. After Rose spoke to you and you went to 145th
          street and Seventh avenue, did you see any one? A.
          Yes, we saw Lefty Louie, Whitey Lewis, Dago Frank
          and Gyp.

          Q. Did you say anything to them? A. They wanted to
          know when I would bring them the money. I made an
          appointment to meet them at Fiftieth street and
          Eighth avenue.

          Q. Where did you see them? A. At Fiftieth street
          and Eighth avenue.

          Q. Prior to that time had you seen Webber? A. Yes,
          sir.

          Q. Did you receive any money from him? A. No, sir.

          Q. Did you see anything passed by Webber to any one
          else? A. I saw Webber pass money to Jack Rose.

          Q. Was that money presented to the gunmen at
          Fiftieth street and Eighth avenue? A. Yes, sir.

          Q. Who had it? A. Jack Rose.

          Q. What did he do? A. He passed it to Lefty Louie.

          Q. Did you go away then? A. Yes.

          Q. Did Lefty Louie? A. Yes, and took the money with
          him.

          Q. What did you and Rose do? A. We went to the home
          of Harry Pollok on Riverside Drive.

          Q. How long did you stay there? A. I stayed for
          dinner.

          Q. Then where did you go? A. To the Lafayette
          Baths.

          Q. The next morning, what did you do? A. I went to
          Pollok’s and remained about four hours. I then went
          downtown and later returned to Pollok’s. I stayed
          until about 10:30.

          Q. Where did you go next? A. I went to Lieut.
          Becker’s apartment.

          Q. Did you see Becker? A. Yes.

          Q. Where was that? A. At the Belleclaire apartments.

          Q. How did you happen to go there? A. Jack Rose
          sent me.

          Q. Repeat the conversation you had with Becker. A.
          I told Becker that Jack Rose was sick and worried,
          and that he sent me to him to see what he was going
          to do. Becker said Rose was not to worry. He said:
          “Don’t mind anything. I’ll fix it all right. They
          have to prove who killed Rosenthal before they can
          convict any one.”

          Q. What then? A. Then I left. As I was about to
          leave I pulled out a cigarette and started to light
          it. Becker said, “Don’t light that match; somebody
          is across the street and if they see a light they
          will suspect something. They have been trailing me
          all day.”

          Q. Was the apartment lighted or dark? A. It was
          dark.

          Q. Did Becker say anything else? A. Yes. He asked
          me if the gunmen had been paid and I told him that
          they had. Then I left.

          Q. Then what did you do? A. I went back to Pollok’s.

          Q. Did any one arrive while you were at Pollok’s?
          A. No; somebody was there before I got there.

          Q. Who was that? A. Mr. Hart.

          Q. Who do you mean? A. Attorney John Hart, who is
          sitting there.

          The witness nodded toward John W. Hart, who has
          been Becker’s lawyer since before the murder of
          Rosenthal.

          Mr. Moss had no further questions to put to the
          witness and the direct examination ended at 11:02
          A. M., having occupied only twenty-seven minutes.

          [_The report of the cross-examination and other
          details of the day’s proceedings in the trial
          followed under separate heads._]

          *       *       *       *       *

          GRAND LARCENY CASE

          _Duluth Herald_

          Commercializing his remarkable faculty for
          imitating a paralytic has proven to be the downfall
          of Charles F. Koch, 45, the black sheep of a
          respectable German family residing at Rosedale,
          Iowa. And because his game of faking injuries and
          collecting large sums from railroad companies and
          other corporations has been detected and exposed,
          Koch must look forward to serving a term of years
          in the Minnesota state penitentiary.

          It took a jury just nine minutes in Judge Fesler’s
          division of the district court yesterday to find
          Koch guilty of the crime of grand larceny in the
          second degree under an indictment which charged
          him with having defrauded the Duluth & Iron Range
          Railroad company out of $1,000 on a fake personal
          injury. The jury retired at 3:36 o’clock and
          returned with a finding of guilty at 3:45 o’clock.

          The same blank, fixed expression which has
          characterized Koch since his trial began did not
          change one iota when the verdict of guilty was
          read in his presence. He maintained the same
          expressionless attitude of indifference as to what
          was going on about him and seemed to be unconcerned
          as to whether he would be acquitted or not. The
          crime of which he stands convicted is punishable by
          imprisonment in the state penitentiary from one to
          ten years.

          On Oct. 14, 1914, Koch was a passenger on No. 61,
          of the Duluth & Iron Range, a mixed train leaving
          Duluth at 11:30 p. m. On arriving at Two Harbors
          at 12:45 a. m., he left the coach and as he did
          so, according to his claim, his raincoat, which
          he carried on his arm, caught on an angle cock or
          brake staff and he was thrown to the depot platform
          and suffered an injury to his back. As a result,
          he claimed, his lower limbs, bowels and bladder
          were paralyzed. Examination by surgeons seemed to
          indicate that he was permanently disabled, and on
          Dec. 7, the company settled with him for $1,000 for
          his alleged injuries. Koch, who had been moving
          with great difficulty on crutches, immediately
          left the city and at once discarded his crutches.

          The railroad authorities secured a warrant for his
          arrest and after detectives had chased him through
          several cities of the Middle West, he was arrested
          at Tonopah, Nev. He was brought to Duluth under an
          extradition process and stood trial on the charge.
          During the course of his trial much of his past
          history, and a more or less unbroken story of his
          operations, were brought to the light of day.

          Koch was born forty-five years ago in Germany
          and emigrated to this country when a boy of 15,
          settling at Rosedale, Iowa. He married when a
          young man, but, after his wife had lived with him
          ten years, she secured a divorce from him on the
          grounds that he had been convicted of a crime and
          committed to the Iowa state penitentiary. This was
          in 1903. She remarried. Koch’s parents are old and
          respected residents of Rosedale.

          In 1903 Koch joined the army, enlisting in the
          state of Washington. Two months later, however,
          he was discharged on account of “chronic anaemia
          and debility.” In 1906 he claimed that he had been
          injured while working at Missoula for the Northern
          Pacific, brought suit for $50,000 and recovered
          $5,000 in the lower court. The case dragged on
          six years in the Montana courts and judgment was
          finally reversed in January, 1912. A portion of
          the time Koch spent on a poor farm, supposedly a
          down-and-out cripple, forced into the almshouse by
          the law’s delay. He went by the name of C. F. Post.

          In July, 1911, at Portland, Or., posing as C. F.
          Pantle, he secured from the Portland Light & Power
          company a sum of money on a fake injury. On Feb.
          16, 1912, at Breckenridge, Minn., under the alias
          of C. F. Jones, he secured $4,500 from the Great
          Northern Railway company for injuries claimed to
          have been sustained in falling from a passenger
          coach step. On Aug. 12 of the same year, as
          Clarence F. Main, he again tried to work this game,
          but unfortunately ran up against the same claim
          agent at Great Falls, Mont., who recognized him as
          an impostor and had him arrested. He served four
          months in the Montana penitentiary.

          On Feb. 28, 1914, at Hampton, Iowa, he claimed that
          he was injured while alighting from a train, and on
          May 9, 1914, collected $600 from the Minneapolis
          and St. Paul Railway company. On July 23, 1914,
          while crossing a railroad crossing at Grand Rapids,
          Mich., he was injured, he claimed, and he later
          extracted $1,600 from the Grand Rapids & Indiana
          Railroad company. His latest offense was the affair
          of the Duluth & Iron Range Railroad company.

          Koch will be brought before Judge Fesler later
          for sentence. Those who are familiar with Koch’s
          history declare that whiskey brought about his
          ruin and that as soon as he made a good haul while
          operating his game he would spend it all for liquor.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUPREME COURT DECISION

          _Brooklyn Eagle_

          That an employer is not responsible for the acts
          of his servant that cause damage to another when
          those acts are not committed in furtherance of
          the master’s business, was the decision of the
          Appellate Division of the Supreme Court, First
          Division, when it reversed a case which the lower
          court had decided against a Manhattan department
          store. The reversal in favor of the department
          store was given by the court on an appeal taken by
          the attorney, Abraham Oberstein, of 299 Broadway,
          Manhattan.

          This case is of considerable importance to
          employers, for the reason that their employes
          often get into altercations with employes of other
          concerns, damages sometimes ensue, and then the
          question arises whether the employer is responsible
          for the acts of his servant. As the justices of
          the Appellate Division view the question, the
          issue is not whether an inflicter of damages was
          in the employ of a certain firm, but whether he
          was promoting the firm’s interest in inflicting
          the damages. If he was, then the master is
          responsible, providing it was within the scope of
          the employer’s duties, and if it was not, then the
          master is not responsible, no matter how grievous
          or serious the injury inflicted may be.

          Adolph Miller, through his guardian, instituted
          suit for assault against Attorney Oberstein’s
          client. Miller was a driver in the employ of
          another concern, and was about to deliver goods
          at the store when one of the latter’s drivers
          asked for the berth Miller was entitled to. Miller
          refused. The other driver, he alleges, assaulted
          him. Then he directed suit against the department
          store concern, under the employers’ liability act.
          The lower court decided for Miller, but Lawyer
          Oberstein appealed and the Appellate Division
          reversed the decision, saying that Miller’s suit
          should have been dismissed.

          The opinion, written by Presiding Justice
          Gildersleeve and concurred in by Justice McLean,
          says:

          “The test of liability in such cases depends upon
          the question whether the injury was committed by
          the authority of the master, expressly conferred,
          or fairly inferable from the nature of the
          employment and the duties incident thereto. The
          mere statement of this rule answers the question
          in favor of the defendant in this case. The act of
          the driver was a wilful and malicious act. It was
          not done in furtherance of his master’s business
          and was in no way connected with or incident to
          the performance of any of the duties intrusted
          to him as a driver, or which could be considered
          as promoting the defendant’s interests. The rule
          as stated in Gervin vs. N. Y. Central R. R. Co.,
          166 N. Y. 289, is as follows: ‘If a servant goes
          outside of his employment and, without regard to
          his service, acting maliciously or in order to
          effect some purpose of his own, wantonly commits a
          trespass or causes damage to another, the master
          is not responsible.’ The plaintiff failed to prove
          any liability on the part of the defendant and the
          defendant’s motion to dismiss the complaint should
          have been granted.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUPREME COURT DECISION

          _Duluth Herald_

          Eighteen months have elapsed since little Florence
          Lemoine, a pretty, dark-eyed dancer of 18 years,
          fell from a sidewalk on West Fourth street and
          sustained an injury to her back and spine which
          has left her a helpless and lifelong paralytic.
          Unconscious of her true condition and hopeful of
          the future, the once popular little vaudeville
          performer lies on her cot at her father’s ranch
          near Moscow, Idaho, planning theater engagements
          she will never fill and dreaming of new gowns and
          dances.

          Yesterday the Minnesota supreme court handed down
          a decision which affirms the judgment of the
          district court of this city where, a few months
          ago, a $5,000 verdict was obtained against the city
          of Duluth in her favor. A jury last April awarded
          her damages in that amount, but the city asked for
          judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Judge Kesler
          denied the motion and an appeal was taken by the
          city to the supreme court, the municipality denying
          its liability. The higher tribunal held that the
          city was liable.

          On Aug. 17, 1913, Florence stepped off a sidewalk
          on the lower side of West Fourth street between
          Lake and First avenues west. The accident occurred
          during the evening while Mrs. Jane Lemoine
          was escorting her two daughters, Florence and
          15-year-old Grace, to the Happy Hour theater, where
          they were filling an engagement. The sidewalk at
          this point is elevated several inches above the
          abutting property and at the time of the accident
          was unprotected by a rail.

          Florence slipped and fell on her back. Her injuries
          at first were believed to be of a slight nature.
          Later surgeons pronounced her suffering from spinal
          trouble and paralysis of the lower limbs. She was
          taken to her room at the Frederick hotel, where
          the Lemoines were stopping, and there remained
          until after the trial of the suit against the city
          last April. The Lemoines left for Moscow, Idaho,
          about six months ago. Denny & Denny, attorneys for
          Frederick Lemoine, the girl’s father, who brought
          suit on behalf of his injured daughter, recently
          received word that the girl’s condition was not
          much improved. She is still in bed. Since her
          accident Florence has been of a cheerful frame of
          mind, probably because her true condition has been
          carefully withheld from her.

          At the time of the accident, the two girls were
          appearing in a singing and dancing act at the local
          theater. Both are talented in their line and their
          appearance in Duluth was during their second season
          on the stage.

          The Lemoines, up to five years ago, lived in
          Baltimore. The two girls appeared in a number of
          amateur theatrical performances in that city and
          there received their training for professional
          work. In 1910 their father, who was then suffering
          from a nervous breakdown, moved West, taking his
          family with him.

          After the Lemoines had settled in the West, the
          children became much in demand at church socials
          and amateur theatricals on account of their talent
          along that line. Later, the girls were offered a
          vaudeville engagement with a song and dance act.
          At first the mother refused to allow her daughters
          to go on the stage, but after a flattering salary
          had been offered, she finally consented. She
          accompanied them on their tour as chaperone. The
          season was about half over when Florence met with
          her accident. The father remained on the ranch in
          Idaho because of his poor health.

          During the trial of the case last April, Florence
          was brought into the courtroom on two occasions,
          both times on her cot. She nervously twitched at
          her bedclothes and at her jewelry while she told
          the story of the affair as she remembered it. She
          told the jury that she was spending most of her
          time now drawing sketches and that until she got
          well enough to get back to the stage she expected
          to devote her time to art.

          The two girls were earning from $75 to $140 a week
          with their act, according to testimony which was
          adduced at the trial.

          *       *       *       *       *

          UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT DECISION

          _San Francisco Chronicle_

          The Supreme Court of the United States has decided
          in the case of Mrs. Ethel Coope Mackenzie of
          San Francisco that the federal expatriation law
          of 1907 is constitutionally applicable to women
          that continue to live in this country after
          marrying foreigners as well as to those that marry
          foreigners and live abroad.

          The ruling settles finally a test case that has
          become internationally famous in suffrage circles.
          In effect, it is much more sweeping than the bare
          recorded fact would indicate, including in its wide
          range a host of women, in and out of states where
          they have the vote, who are married to men not
          citizens of the United States.

          It means, applied locally, simply this: A woman
          born in California, herself a citizen of the United
          States with the right to vote, automatically
          relinquishes her citizenship and that right the
          moment she becomes the wife of a foreigner, whether
          the foreigner is a resident or not.

          Mrs. Mackenzie, who brought the test case, is the
          wife of Gordon Mackenzie, known on the concert
          platform as Mackenzie Gordon, the Scotch tenor. Her
          husband, who is a nephew of the late Sir Morell
          Mackenzie, a famous English surgeon, has been a
          resident of San Francisco for the last twelve
          years. He has lived in this country for more than
          twenty years. She was herself born in California,
          the daughter of J. F. Coope of Santa Cruz, a well
          known California pioneer. But the fact that her
          husband, born a British subject, has never taken
          out citizenship papers in this country, makes Mrs.
          Mackenzie, by the ruling of the supreme court, an
          alien in the eyes of the law of the United States.

          A curious feature of the unusual case is that Mrs.
          Mackenzie was one of the most ardent of the workers
          for suffrage during the campaign which resulted in
          the women being given the vote in California.

          The ruling affects also, in sweeping fashion, a
          large number of other women socially prominent in
          San Francisco. It includes Baroness Van Eck, who
          was Miss Agnes Tillman and who is still a resident
          of this state; Baroness Von Brincken, formerly Miss
          Milo Abercombie, also living here; Countess Von
          Falkenstein, who was Miss Azalea P. Keyes; Mrs.
          John Hubert Ward, who was Miss Jean Reid, and a
          great number of others.

          Mrs. Mackenzie, who, since her marriage to the
          famous tenor in August, 1909, has been living at
          2832 Jackson Street, was among the first to appear
          at the polls after the state had enfranchised its
          feminine population. She was refused the privilege
          of voting. The California courts, in which the case
          was instituted, decided against her. Now the ruling
          of the highest tribunal in the country upholds the
          lower courts.

          “It was something of a shock,” she said, “to learn
          that after two years of hard work to bring suffrage
          to California I could not enjoy the right I had
          helped to give other women. Investigation showed,
          of course, that I could gain my citizenship and my
          right to vote, and also retain my husband, by his
          application for naturalization papers, but I did
          not wish to accept citizenship on those terms, and
          so I brought a test case.

          “My husband kindly delayed his citizenship until my
          case might be presented in the courts. Now that it
          is decided, he will become a citizen. This means
          that I shall be received back into the fold, but
          only because I am his wife.”

          Concerning the effect of her test case, Mrs.
          Mackenzie stated that she had just heard that a
          Mackenzie Club had been organized in Oregon, for
          the purpose of “looking into the matter.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          OPINION OF ATTORNEY GENERAL

          _Wisconsin State Journal_

          Excess fare cannot be charged of passengers on the
          railroads of Wisconsin when tickets are purchased
          on the trains, unless provision is made to refund
          the amount of overcharge.

          This is the effect of an opinion rendered by
          Attorney General F. L. Gilbert today. Prior to the
          passage of the two-cent fare law the Northwestern
          and St. Paul roads charged 10 cents in addition to
          the regular fare when the fare was paid on trains.
          This practice was temporarily discontinued when the
          two-cent fare law was passed, because of the heavy
          penalty provided for violations. An attempt has
          been made to find out if the railroad commission
          would not permit this additional fee being charged.
          An opinion was asked of the attorney general. He
          said:

          “It seems to me that the plain spirit, intent and
          purpose of the law in question was to establish a
          maximum passenger rate beyond which common carriers
          could not, in any event, go and retain the excess
          as their absolute property.

          “I am therefore of the opinion that such excess
          fare cannot be legally collected from a passenger
          unless provision is made for refund, or an act of
          the legislature is passed allowing the collection
          and retention of said excess as a penalty for
          failure to purchase a ticket at a point where
          facilities are provided.”

          About two weeks ago, Lloyd W. Bowers, general
          counsel for the Northwestern and Burton Hanson,
          general solicitor for the St. Paul, brought this
          matter before the commission. During the course
          of a conference, the railroads claimed that the
          old law allowing an excess fare to be charged had
          not been abrogated. The attorney general held
          differently.

          *       *       *       *       *

          INSANITY CASE

          _Chicago Herald_

          Baptiste Bardoli is on his way.

          Over in Italy, on a big estate at Lenno, near the
          shores of Lake Como, Baptiste’s aged father is
          waiting to see him--that is, he was waiting to see
          him when Baptiste last heard, about three months
          ago.

          Baptiste was on his way to Italy last June when he
          left his home in Oakland, Cal., provided with some
          $200 in cash, long green tickets for the train and
          small red tickets for the boat--clear to Italy.

          Baptiste also took with him two large bottles of
          Zinfandel. The bottles were wrapped in twisted
          straw, through which the red wine could be seen
          sparkling inside the green glass.

          The traveler arrived in Chicago without the bottles
          but with the contents. Policemen met Baptiste at
          the railroad station. They stopped him from biting
          the iron fence of the train shed. They took him to
          the Harrison street police station.

          A man wearing a white coat came in and looked at
          Baptiste. The man took a yellow sheet of paper and
          wrote as follows:

          “June 30, 1914.--I have examined Baptiste Bardoli
          and believe him to be insane and recommend his
          commitment to an institution. He is on his way from
          Oakland, Cal., to Italy and arrived in Chicago on
          the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Company.
          Respectfully,
              ALFRED LEROY, M. D.,
                Assistant City Physician.”

          Baptiste was taken to the detention home. On
          July 2 a jury composed of one physician heard
          testimony concerning Baptiste’s actions and
          returned a verdict to the effect that Baptiste was
          insane--that he had “alcoholic hallucinosis”--that
          he manifested suicidal and homicidal tendencies and
          had about $96 on his person.

          County Judge John E. Owens appointed Walter F.
          Sommers, an attorney, conservator for the money,
          and turned Baptiste over to the Chicago State
          Hospital for the Insane at Dunning.

          Baptiste “came to” on July 4 and called for his
          trousers. He was denied. He protested his sanity.
          He admitted his temporary inebriety, but swore that
          he had no more bottles of green glass wrapped in
          straw. It was no use.

          Baptiste wrote letters to the Italian consul. He
          implored the doctors and pictured for them the
          father who was waiting to see him on the shores
          of Lake Como. About a month ago he convinced the
          Dunning authorities of his sanity, and they began
          to arrange for his release.

          Investigators at the office of the Italian consul
          declared that they tried to get Conservator
          Sommers to turn over some money to Baptiste, so
          that he could be released. They say Attorney
          Sommers replied that under the Illinois law he
          had been appointed for a year, and as far as the
          court records showed, Baptiste was still insane.
          Moreover, it was vacation time, and there was no
          session of the Probate Court.

          Yesterday Judge Owens entered an order restoring
          Baptiste to his civilian rights. Probate Judge
          Gregg ordered the restoration of the funds held by
          the conservator. The funds were restored. He was
          freed from the asylum.

          In Illinois the records, however, will show until
          a year has passed that Baptiste is insane and that
          he can only conduct business legally through his
          conservator, who can’t be removed for a year.

          But Baptiste is happy--he’s on his way to Italy.

          *       *       *       *       *

          PROPOSED LAW SUIT

          _New York Sun_

          For why should the Kaminoka Strumolova Sick and
          Benevolent Association pay out money for burying a
          man who is not yet dead? For why that hearse, $8;
          that headstone, $35; those two funeral coaches for
          $11 when Leon Welfish, the dear dead one, is alive
          already and in his own town of Kaminoka, Galicia?

          Not for often will the Kaminoka Strumolova Sick
          and Benevolent Association make such a fool of
          itself and those money spendings for the hearse,
          the headstone, the funeral coaches and all the rest
          making of Two Hu-u-ndred dollars!--to the court
          here by a lawyer the Kaminoka Strumolova is going
          for recovering. To the court by Lawyer William
          Schneider the Kaminoka Strumolova is going and
          make for getting back all that money because Leon
          Welfish did not have the use of it, being not at
          all dead and buried.

          Aye-yah; it is all right enough for the hospital
          people in the place at Central Islip to say that
          there was mistaking in sending Leon Welfish to be
          buried by the Kaminoka Strumolova when it was not
          Leon at all who had died, but some one else. It’s
          all right to say these things, but that does not
          pay back the moneys for such a comfortable funeral
          that some one else enjoyed. Oh no. The State of
          New York by the courts will have to pay back those
          moneys for those mistakes. It is to the Court of
          Claims in Washington that the lawyer is going
          to make the State to pay up these losses by the
          Kaminoka Strumolova.

          Listen.

          Came to this country from Kaminoka, which is in
          Galicia, which is of Austria, Leon Welfish, a young
          man who did not have great strength but who was
          honest and who would never try to cheat anybody.
          Came Leon Welfish by New York and he worked as
          tailor until one night when he didn’t work, but
          fell down on the sidewalk by Lewis street and they
          takes him to Bellevue. They looks at him for three
          days--observations, they calls it--and then they
          sends him to the State hospital for poor insane
          ones at Central Islip. Leon goes and everybody is
          sorry that he is one of the poor insane ones.

          But then, before Leon Welfish is by the hospital
          very long, comes the immigrationers from Ellis
          Island and they say Leon Welfish is unfit for being
          in this country and never should have come by New
          York. Back he goes to Kaminoka, Galicia; so say
          these immigrationers.

          Everybody believes that Leon Welfish must go back
          to Kaminoka, and his friends by Rivington street
          are mourning that such a good boy goes home. Then
          one day--it was the 5th day of August, two years
          ago--comes to one of Leon Welfish’s friends by
          Rivington street this message from the hospital:

          “Leon Welfish is dead. Pleurisy makes it. Shall we
          bury him or do his friends make the buryings?”

          Of course it is to be that the Kaminoka Strumolova,
          which is the society belonging to Leon Welfish,
          shall make the buryings. Leon was a member standing
          good and every member has for his money a good
          burial or good doctors when in sickness. So says
          the Kaminoka Strumolova, “We make the buryings.”

          They makes. It costs all the $8 for hearse, $35
          for headstones and the rest of those $200 which
          belongs to Leon Welfish for being a dead member of
          the Kaminoka Strumolova. Nobody sees Leon Welfish
          before the buryings, for the hospital people sends
          it so no one sees. All of the society makes of
          itselves assessments for paying the funeral and
          three members of committee wear white gloves and
          rides in those for $11 hacks to Mount Zion Cemetery.

          Leon Welfish’s papa and mamma, which are by
          Kaminoka yet, gets a letter from the Kaminoka
          Strumolova which says Leon is dead and has a good
          buryings for $200--a very good buryings--and very
          sorry to have to say these sad tidings. Then Leon
          Welfish’s papa and mamma make mournings by their
          dead son, and all of his friends by Kaminoka make
          mournings.

          Comes to Kaminoka then one very dark and rainy
          night Leon Welfish, who was sent home by the
          immigrationers. Comes Leon and knocks at the door
          of his papa and mamma’s house.

          “Hello, my papa; hello, my mamma!” says Leon when
          they opens the door, and Leon’s papa calls for
          police and Leon’s mamma has a fit on the floor
          right in front of him.

          After that Leon Welfish and Leon’s papa and mamma
          make a great rage because he was dead and is not
          really dead. They make writings to the Kaminoka
          Strumolova to know for why was that mistake made.
          Strumolova makes investigations and now it goes to
          court by a lawyer.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUIT FOR SEPARATION

          _New York Telegram_

          Alleging that for the sake of her three children
          she had endured verbal and physical abuse of
          violent character for seventeen years, Mrs. Clara
          Hansen, of No. 10 Western Parkway, to-day filed
          suit for separation in the Supreme Court against
          her husband, Harry L. Hansen, worth a million,
          and half owner in the Schmidt and Hansen Brewing
          Company of Newark. Mr. Hansen makes his home at No.
          190 East Ninety-ninth street.

          Accompanying the affidavits of Mrs. Hansen is a
          deposition from her sixteen-year-old son, Oscar,
          in which he corroborates many of the stories of
          beatings and other abuses alleged by his mother,
          and makes the statement that his father’s treatment
          of himself was such that he was glad when his
          mother established a second home and took the
          children with her. In addition to Oscar, the
          Hansens have a daughter, Nellie, thirteen, and
          another son, Henry, twelve years old.

          Mrs. Hansen was represented in the preliminary
          court proceedings by Mrs. Harriette M.
          Johnston-Wood, of the law firm of Wood & Wood,
          No. 2 Rector street, a well known leader of the
          suffragist movement.

          In the papers filed Mrs. Hansen states that she was
          married to Harry L. Hansen in this city in 1897
          and that they went from New York to Washington to
          begin their honeymoon trip. Three days after the
          wedding, she alleges, while they were still in
          Washington, her husband became violently angry and,
          after choking her, threw her against the furniture
          in their room.

          Later, at the Grand Hotel, at St. Augustine, Fla.,
          he refused to talk to her, she asserts, and they
          returned to this city without speaking to each
          other. Their first home, she says, was established
          in a house owned by Mr. Hansen, at No. 99 East
          Eightieth street, and there, she sets forth, he
          beat her frequently and repeatedly swore at her,
          and said, “I hate your peaceful face; I’m tired of
          it.”

          Before Oscar was born, in 1898, she further
          alleges, her husband accused her of being on
          friendly terms with the tradesmen who came to the
          house. After the boy was born he told her that,
          since he had an heir, he had no further use for her
          and, opening the front door, said, “This way out.”

          In 1900, she says, while she was in Berlin with her
          husband, she was compelled to go to a sanitarium,
          and later, when they were in the Alps, he left her
          and went to England, where she finally located him.

          To escape his abuse two years later, she went to
          Philadelphia, and in 1909 she went to Europe with
          her daughter, returning later at her husband’s
          earnest requests. The final separation, she states,
          took place in 1911, when she established a separate
          home for herself and her children.

          In the deposition made by the son Oscar, he states
          that on several occasions he saw his father beat
          and abuse his mother. The boy also states that his
          father had violent fits of temper on an average
          of once a month and that on one occasion, when he
          became displeased with the boy, he drew a knife and
          destroyed the wireless apparatus which the child
          had spent an entire winter in building.

          Mrs. Hansen asks for $200 a week temporary alimony
          and $25,000 counsel fees. She states that the
          brewery in which her husband is interested turns
          out 750,000 barrels of beer annually and that he
          has other sources of income.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DIVORCE CASE

          _Detroit News_

          The story of the married life of Dr. Arthur and
          Mildred S. Smith, from 1900 to 1913 reads the same
          as that of any struggling young physician in a
          large city. But--

          In 1913 the physician found fortune smiling on him
          and he turned to look at his wife and his gold. She
          had faded during those years when $1 was made to
          last longer than $10 would now.

          “I am just in his way now,” said Mrs. Smith to
          Judge Van Zile, while testifying in her suit for
          divorce. The doctor filed his bill several months
          ago and she filed a cross-bill.

          A younger girl, with golden hair, red cheeks and
          lips has come between the doctor and his wife,
          according to Mrs. Smith.

          “I filled in all right when someone was needed to
          slave and dig the dirt out of the office floors
          and dust the furniture,” continued the woman. “He
          didn’t have time to look at me then to see whether
          I looked good to him or not.

          “We worked mechanically, shoulder to shoulder. I
          played my part and he played his. The business and
          my husband’s bank account would lead anyone to
          think that it was a success.”

          Mrs. Smith, a little woman, her eyes filled
          with tears, seemed to reflect a moment and then
          continued:

          “Perhaps it is a success. It seems that success
          must be measured in dollars and cents no matter who
          gets the gold. He undoubtedly is happy, but--I--I
          am a wreck.”

          Mrs. Smith said that when her baby was born her
          husband told her not to stay in the hospital too
          long as she was needed in the office. She says that
          she left the hospital in three weeks and the child
          died at the end of five weeks.

          “It was always so,” she continued. “He always
          wanted me in the office and I was willing to stay.
          It was only a few years ago that he went abroad,
          and I remained at home, as we both agreed that
          it would cost too much for us both. Then he took
          several other equally expensive trips, but he never
          asked me to go.”

          Mrs. Smith said she and her husband had always been
          active in the Summerfield Methodist church, and
          that her husband even carried his dislike for her
          to the church, urging her not to go to any of the
          meetings, either social or religious.

          “I was active in home missionary work,” said Mrs.
          Smith, “and he told me that it didn’t look well for
          me always to be mixing in with the church affairs.
          I told him I couldn’t conscientiously drop my
          church work and wouldn’t.”

          Mrs. Smith declared her husband had told her he
          couldn’t afford to live with her any longer as she
          wasn’t so attractive as another girl he knew and
          her company tired him instead of affording him rest
          and comfort.

          “His father also told me that I might as well
          get out right away as Walter had to have some one
          younger and more attractive,” she said. “The old
          father said: ‘You don’t fit into Walter’s station
          in life and you might as well get out without a
          fuss, as you will have to move some time.’”

          Mrs. Smith testified that her husband’s practice
          is worth between $400 and $600 a week, and that he
          owns three automobiles.

          “I just rode in one of them, however,” she added.
          “The office girl rides in them most of the time.”

          Dr. Smith stated in his bill that his wife had an
          ungovernable temper and that she called up his
          patients and advised them not to consult him. The
          doctor further stated that these and other things
          ruined his health and his business.

          Mrs. Smith was given the decree.

          *       *       *       *       *

          RECEIVERSHIP PROCEEDINGS

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Inflated reports of sales by managers of branch
          houses, extending over a period of three years,
          and resulting in a misleading annual statement,
          it was said yesterday, were responsible for the
          receivership proceedings for Robert Z. Link & Co.

          The Chicago banks which were the principal
          creditors of the corporation discovered the
          character of these statements a few days ago in
          an audit of the books, and at once took steps to
          protect creditors.

          The other explanation advanced for the crisis in
          the company’s affairs came from Secretary William
          H. Arthur.

          “In the panic last fall,” he declared, “poor
          people, who are the firm’s principal customers,
          could not afford to buy even the cheapest fish.
          They became vegetarians. If we could have tided
          over our financial difficulties until after Lent
          we would have weathered the storm. Trade was just
          beginning to pick up.”

          Developments of the day were as follows:

            Receiver William T. Harrison, learning that fish,
            oysters, and other sea foods were lying in the
            cars, took measures to obtain the fullest powers in
            conducting a business based upon transactions in
            perishable products.

            Four Chicago banks that hold nearly $2,500,000 of
            the firm’s paper, some of it accepted two months
            ago, held a conference and discussed reorganization
            of the company.

            Minority creditors prepared to organize.

            Efforts were made to find out what the company
            did with the proceeds of $1,000,000 worth of
            preferred stock issued last October. Officials say
            it was used to take up short term notes and to
            buy warehouses and plants to prevent competition.
            Creditors believe exorbitant sums were paid for the
            plants.

            Ancillary receivers were appointed for branch
            plants of the company in various parts of the
            country.

            Receiver Harrison issues a statement practically
            exonerating Link brothers for blame for the
            financial straits of the Company.

          An official of one of the four Chicago banks which
          hold nearly $2,500,000 of the firm’s paper said
          that the receiver was appointed after the banks had
          learned that some persons connected with Robert
          Z. Link & Co. had issued misleading statements
          concerning its volume of business. The Link
          brothers are not believed to have known anything
          about these false statements.

          The company, it appears, has a number of ambitious
          managers of its branch houses in various parts
          of the country. Each manager gets a percentage
          on his total sales. Some of them, to obtain the
          commission, it is asserted, juggled their reports
          in such a manner that their total sales appeared
          to be much larger than they really were, and the
          annual report was in consequence misleading. The
          company had no system of checking up these reported
          sales, and it was not until the bankers put an
          auditing firm upon the books, after they suspected
          something following the issuance of the last annual
          statement, that the discrepancies were discovered.

          The fact that the last annual statement does not
          account for new money, the proceeds of the last
          stock issue, also is being investigated.

          Secretary Arthur had a different explanation to
          make.

          “The panic of last fall, and vegetarianism to
          which the poor were reduced when thrown out of
          employment,” he declared, “are responsible for most
          of our troubles.

          “It is a well known fact that the company supplied
          two-thirds of the oysters, fish, and all sea food
          eaten in this country. The bulk of this trade is
          among poor people. The company’s chief business has
          been in fish that retails at 8, 10, and 15 cents a
          pound, especially in large cities. We depended most
          upon our business in fresh water fish--the largest
          in the world in herring, lake perch and such
          cheaper varieties. This trade came from working
          people.

          “When the working people were thrown out of
          employment and stopped buying fish, our trade fell
          off tremendously. It has just begun to pick up, and
          if the bankers had not taken alarm and had given
          us a little more time, we should have come out all
          right.”

          Mr. Arthur said that the $1,000,000 acquired in the
          last issue of preferred stock had mostly gone to
          pay short term notes.

          Receiver Harrison in the afternoon went to Lake
          Geneva to hold a conference with Judge Kohlsaat,
          who had been originally selected as the judge
          before whom the receivership proceedings were to be
          held.

          “I wish to secure the fullest authority for
          conducting the business, which is based so largely
          upon perishable products, so that there will be
          no loss,” said Mr. Harrison. “I already have
          that power, but I want to have it specified more
          clearly.”

          Representatives from several railroads called on
          Mr. Harrison before his departure to ask what
          should be done with quantities of fish that were
          standing in the cars on sidetracks. The company
          has $600,000 in available cash to carry on its
          business. It is estimated that $1,000,000 will be
          needed.

          Mr. Harrison made a statement in which he said:

          “From the examination of the books of Robert
          Z. Link & Co. that has been possible since my
          appointment as receiver I should say that the Link
          family owns about 60 per cent of the preferred, and
          about 50 per cent of the common stock. When the
          $1,000,000 of preferred stock was issued within the
          year, it would appear that the Link family paid
          their assessment on this stock and took their full
          pro rata, and I cannot find that any transfer of
          any of their shares has been made.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          ASSIGNMENT

          _New York Times_

          Henry W. Williams, who carried on a banking and
          brokerage business at 33 Wall Street, assigned
          yesterday for the benefit of his creditors, to Mark
          T. Cox of the firm of Robert Winthrop & Co. Mr.
          Williams was the publisher of Williams’ Investors’
          Manual, and is a director in several other concerns.

          No figures were given out yesterday as to the
          extent of his liabilities, but it was said by a
          representative of important banking interests that
          no complications involving other Wall Street houses
          need be expected as a result of the failure. First
          estimates put the loss at between $5,000,000 and
          $10,000,000, but as the part which H. W. Williams
          & Co. has played recently in the money market has
          been steadily diminishing, it is believed that
          the liabilities will amount to from $1,000,000 to
          $2,000,000. Hawkins & Delafield are the attorneys
          for some of the principal creditors of the firm.

          Lewis L. Delafield of this firm conferred yesterday
          afternoon with John L. Cadwalader of Strong &
          Cadwalader, the attorneys for the assignee. They
          gave out this statement after the conference:

            Henry W. Williams, transacting business in
            the State of New York under the name of H. W.
            Williams & Co., has made a general assignment for
            the benefit of creditors to Mark T. Cox of Robert
            Winthrop & Co. There are no preferences beyond
            such as the statute gives to employes.

            A superficial examination justifies the belief
            that if the creditors, who are few in number,
            will co-operate in enabling the assignee to
            effect a favorable liquidation of the assets, a
            large sum will be realized for their benefit.
            Written assurances of important financial
            assistance to such creditors as will co-operate
            to that end have been given.

            Neither Mr. Cox, the assignee, nor Messrs. Robert
            Winthrop & Co. are interested as creditors or
            otherwise in the assigned estate.

          None of the lawyers yesterday would make an
          estimate of the extent of the failure. Some
          surprise was expressed at the wording of the deed
          of assignment filed in the County Clerk’s office.
          It read: “H. W. Williams, trading as H. W. Williams
          & Co.” as though the assignor had no partners in
          the firm. The latest corporation directories give
          the firm’s personnel as H. W. Williams, Frederick
          A. Farrar, W. N. Phoenix, Franklyn W. Hunt, Charles
          F. Cushman, and Henry V. Williams. Of these Messrs.
          Farrar, Hunt, and Cushman live near Boston, where
          the firm had a branch office.

          It was said at the office of Hawkins & Delafield
          that Henry W. Williams some time ago filed the
          necessary deed with the County Clerk authorizing
          him to use the firm name after his partners had
          resigned their interests. No information could be
          obtained as to when the dissolution of partnership
          took place.

          It is understood that Mr. Williams’ resources have
          been dwindling for some time. His firm engaged in
          several unprofitable consolidations, and in the
          slump in stocks of March, 1907, it was reported
          that the concern was hard hit. The October panic
          found it again in bad shape to meet a financial
          storm.

          Mr. Williams began business in 1865 as H. V. &
          H. W. Williams, and became widely known as the
          publisher of Williams’ Investors’ Manual. In 1880
          he entered the banking business as a partner in the
          house of Anthony, Williams & Oliphant. A year later
          this concern was succeeded by Williams, Oliphant &
          Co. It was, however, as a member of the house of
          Williams & Greenough that Mr. Williams attained
          his greatest prominence in Wall Street. He was
          particularly active in leather and ice, and is said
          to have made about $5,000,000 by his operations in
          these lines.

          In 1899 the firm was dissolved, and Mr. Williams
          continued in business as H. W. Williams & Co.
          Since then he has been interested in a number of
          consolidations which have turned out to be heavy
          drains upon him. Among these was the Colonial Sugar
          Company, which has since been absorbed by the Cuban
          American Sugar Company.

          Mr. Williams formed the Colonial concern by merging
          a number of Cuban and Louisiana sugar properties
          in which he was interested. The venture was
          unprofitable, and it was said last night by an
          officer of the company that Mr. Williams’ firm had
          dropped between $300,000 and $400,000 in it.

          Another of his interests was the Newton &
          Northwestern Railroad of Iowa, which has since been
          taken over by the Fort Dodge, Des Moines & Southern
          Railroad. Suit was brought against him recently by
          Howard Willetts on account of the investment which
          he had made in the road on the recommendation of
          Henry Williams & Co. Mr. Willetts is suing for
          $243,000, the price of 200 of the bonds of the
          company, on the ground that the line is not earning
          enough to pay its fixed charges. The case is still
          pending.

          Other concerns in which Mr. Williams has had large
          interests are the Missouri, Kansas & Texas Railway
          Company and the United States Casualty Company, of
          which he was a Director, and the Postal Telegraph
          Cable Company of Texas, of which he is President,
          now a part of the system of the American Telegraph
          and Telephone Company.

          For some years H. W. Williams & Co. has maintained
          an office in Boston. It has dealt exclusively in
          bonds, bidding for local, as well as Massachusetts
          State, and city issues. The last issue in which the
          Boston branch figured was that of the United States
          Envelop Company of Worcester, Mass., which issued
          $2,000,000 worth a couple of months ago. The firm
          has also invested heavily in American Telephone
          Company and Atlanta, Birmingham & Atlantic
          Railroad bonds. Boston bankers do not consider that
          the failure will have any important effect on other
          houses.

          Outside of financial circles Mr. Williams occupied
          an important position in society and was an art
          lover. His house at Tuxedo Park has been known
          as one of the finest examples of modern country
          residences. His town house, 1 Lexington Avenue,
          facing Gramercy Park and exactly opposite to the
          residence of the late Stanford White, one of his
          warm friends, has been renowned for its rich and
          artistic decorations.

          Mr. Williams was a liberal supporter of music, and
          helped many students to follow their profession. He
          is, however, best known as a book collector. For
          years he spent large sums on rare editions and fine
          bindings. He brought together a library with hardly
          an equal in America. Among his special treasures
          were a first edition of Thomas à Kempis’s “Imitatio
          Christi,” Higden’s “Polychronicon,” and some rare
          Americana. His collection was estimated as worth
          between $200,000 and $300,000.

          A few months ago it was announced that this library
          was to be sold at auction. It was the first
          intimation to the world at large that Mr. Williams
          was in financial difficulties. The sale began on
          Nov. 12, and the first day’s offerings brought in
          $19,000. Some of the leading book collectors of the
          country, such as J. Pierpont Morgan and Senator
          Henry C. Lodge, sent representatives, and by the
          time the first two sections had been disposed of
          $75,000 was realized. It is understood that the
          three other sections are still more valuable.

          Five years ago Miss Edith Williams was married to
          Capt. James K. Modison of the Warwick Regiment of
          the British Army. It was one of the most brilliant
          social functions of the year, the best man being
          Sir E. Stewart Richardson, and the ushers Pierre
          Lorillard, R. Monroe Ferguson, Arthur Derby,
          Frederick C. Havemeyer, Jr., J. Insile Blair,
          Jr., J. M. Waterbury, Jr., Henry V. Poor, and
          Roger Poor. The bridesmaids were the Misses Violet
          Cruger, Janet Fish, Muriel Robbins, and Helen
          Cutting.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The way in which the human interest can be
          brought out in what might ordinarily be considered
          routine news, is shown by the second of the
          following two stories._

          PATENT AWARD

          (1)

          _New York Times_

          The Board of Examiners of the Patent Office decided
          that the man who made the hydroaeroplane possible
          was not Glenn H. Curtiss, but Albert S. Janin, a
          poor cabinet maker of Staten Island.

          In 1910 Mr. Curtiss began testing a canoe device
          to carry the planes on the water till the momentum
          necessary to lift them was obtained, but it did not
          work.

          In the controversy that followed the use of the
          present device, which consists mainly of outrigging
          to keep the planes on an even keel, it came out
          that Mr. Janin had really produced the device in
          1909, about a year before Mr. Curtiss had failed to
          raise his machines at Hammondsport.

          Thomas A. Hill, a lawyer, of 233 Broadway, took up
          Janin’s claims and put them before the examiners of
          Interference of the Patent Office. Mr. Hill alleged
          that on July 3, 1910, Curtiss tried four times in
          vain to raise his plane from Lake Keuka; also that
          Curtiss admitted the failure. It was shown that
          drawings of the successful device now in use were
          made by Janin long before this date, and that he
          tried to build a machine to test it in operation,
          but couldn’t get the money.

          Mr. Curtiss contended that the device was his, and
          that it had failed at Lake Keuka because the motors
          were not strong enough to do their share of the
          work. In deciding against Mr. Janin the Examiners
          of Interference said:

            While he (Curtiss) was thus engaged Janin was
            sleeping on his rights, from which slumber he did
            not awake until after the achievements of Curtiss
            had been widely published.

          Then the case was taken before the Board of
          Examiners, who found for Mr. Janin. Their opinion
          reads in part:

            He (Janin) is a poor man, evidently struggling
            for a sufficient income to meet his current
            living expenses. From what his witnesses testify,
            it is apparent that he was continuously striving
            to raise funds to develop his ideas, which were
            regarded by many as illusionary.

          It also came out that Janin, in the years he was
          working on his water flyer, was the butt of many,
          who looked upon him as unbalanced by one idea.

          Concerning the statements of Curtiss that his
          motors were not powerful enough, the Examiners said:

            An excuse of this kind for failure to make
            flights could probably be advanced in good faith
            by hundreds of inventors of aeroplanes, who have
            been seeking patents for the last forty or fifty
            years.

          Mr. Hill said yesterday that Janin’s success
          probably would make him wealthy; also that an
          order for 200 hydroaeroplanes is awaiting any
          manufacturer who can furnish security that they can
          be delivered. He said the order was from one of the
          belligerents in Europe, but did not know which.

          “The Curtiss factory,” he said, “can turn out about
          ten planes a week at a cost of about $7,000 each.
          But no matter who turns them out they will have to
          pay a royalty to Mr. Janin.”

          (2)

          _New York Evening World_

          Albert S. Janin, cabinet maker, the other night
          took off his apron in the shop in which he has
          worked eight hours a day for the last fourteen
          years at Rosebank, Staten Island, walked up to the
          foreman and resigned his job.

          He didn’t quit in a huff--a fact that was plainly
          attested by the manner in which the foreman wrung
          his hand and his fellow workmen crowded around him,
          their faces beaming.

          “Congratulations, Al,” said the foreman simply.
          From somewhere in the crowd spoke one of Janin’s
          intimates:

          “The ‘Bug’ has made good. Whaddaya know about
          that?”

          “Well,” rejoined Janin, good-naturedly, “it no
          longer will be Janin, the cabinet maker, or
          Janin, the Bug, the dreamer and the impostor.
          I guess the handle to my name has been pretty
          firmly established as ‘Janin, inventor of the
          hydro-aeroplane.’”

          And that night the modest little 5-room Janin flat
          was the scene of a celebration the like of which
          has never been seen at Rosebank. Most enthusiastic
          of the guests were men who, for the last ten years,
          have scoffed at the strange looking winged craft
          in the Janin back yard, which, the poor carpenter
          persisted, would some day be recognized by the
          patent office as the first flying boat.

          Rosebank went on the map to stay at 2 o’clock
          in the afternoon, when word was received from
          Washington that the board of examiners-in-chief of
          the patent office had decided unanimously that the
          man who made the hydro-aeroplane possible was not
          Glenn H. Curtiss, but Albert S. Janin, the poor
          cabinet maker of Staten Island. For four years the
          powerful Curtiss interests had fought the claims of
          the obscure and almost penniless carpenter, through
          the patent office and to its highest court--the
          board of examiners-in-chief.

          He would not have won out probably had not Thomas
          A. Hill, a patent lawyer of New York, taken
          the case, out of a sense of justice, without
          compensation. As a former president of the
          Aeronautical Society of America, and at present a
          director, Mr. Hill went into the litigation to see
          fair play.

          Just how it feels to a struggling workman, whose $5
          a day is barely enough to provide the necessities
          of life for a wife and seven children, to find
          himself suddenly famous with a fortune within his
          grasp, Janin tried to explain.

          “We put it over, didn’t we, mother?” Janin beamed,
          affectionately patting his wife. “If it hadn’t been
          that she stuck to me--believed in me, when all the
          rest were poking fun and scoffing--I never would
          have made it.”

          “And if it hadn’t been,” Mrs. Janin interrupted,
          “that after your hard day’s work for almost
          every night in the last ten or fifteen years, you
          burned the oil at your work bench until long after
          midnight, you never would have made it.”

          “The best part of this invention is that, unlike
          a whole lot of others, it’s going to bring us
          money--gobs of it,” Janin broke in. “For years we
          have felt the pinch of poverty, but thanks to Mr.
          Hill and his work in Washington, I guess that day
          is past. You know the decision of the patent office
          gives me a royalty on every hydro-aeroplane turned
          out in this country dating from the day a few weeks
          hence on which my patent is printed and issued
          by the government. Mr. Hill tells me that the
          royalty can be fixed arbitrarily by the inventor.
          The failure of any of these companies building
          hydro-aeroplanes to come to terms, of course, would
          be followed by an infringement suit, but we don’t
          expect any such difficulty.

          “What will I do with the money? The first thing
          will be to get a home of our own with plenty of
          ground around it for the kids to play in. No more
          of these flats for us. But we are going to stay
          right here in Rosebank, where my wife and I were
          born and brought up. You know we were sweethearts,
          even at old public school No. 13, around the
          corner. Most of the kids are now going to that same
          school. The oldest girl, Antoinette, who is now 14,
          can realize her ambition to go to normal school and
          take up teaching, if she wants to--but she don’t
          have to now.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          AN ADOPTED CHILD

          _Kansas City Star_

          The Patrick Sullivans had a bad three hours last
          night.

          You see, it was only a month ago that theirs was
          a childless family. Mary had grown up and was
          teaching and there were no babies around the house.
          Then they found a 1-month-old baby boy, abandoned
          in St. Aloysius’s Church, and adopted him. The
          cheery household it has been since then!

          But yesterday a young woman arrived at the
          Sullivan home, 961 Walnut Street, and said that she
          was the baby’s mother, and that the baby’s father
          had only abandoned him temporarily because they
          were then in desperate straits, but that everything
          had come out all right financially and now wouldn’t
          the Sullivans give her back her boy?

          The Sullivans wouldn’t. Not last night.

          That’s when their bad three hours began. If their
          hearts were wrung so at abandoning a baby not their
          own, what must be the mother’s feelings? That won
          the day.

          Papa Sullivan went to Judge Hinton this morning.
          He, had been to him last week to adopt the baby
          legally. Now he wanted to know if that legal
          process would stand in the way of his returning the
          baby to its mother. Judge Hinton said it would not
          prevent such action, and he believed that it would
          be best to give the child to its mother. But he
          didn’t look at Papa Sullivan when he said it. Men
          don’t like to see each other wet-eyed.

          “She’ll come back,” said Papa Sullivan, “and she
          can get him.”

          Judge Hinton this afternoon made an order at the
          request of Mr. Sullivan declaring the adoption of
          the baby by the Sullivans void. The request was
          made on the ground that the mother had appeared and
          had shown herself capable of properly caring for
          the child. The mother did not appear in court. No
          further action will be necessary. The mother need
          only go to the Sullivan home and get her baby.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The provision in the will given in the New
          York court story making bequests to Chicago nurses,
          formed the basis of the local story in the Chicago
          paper; both stories follow._

          WILL ADMITTED TO PROBATE

          (1)

          _New York Sun_

          The will of Walter H. Hammond, the wealthy
          butterine manufacturer, who was shot dead in the
          Pennsylvania station in Jersey City ten days
          ago by Peter Grew, who had a fancied grievance
          against him, was admitted to probate in Jersey
          City yesterday. After making a number of specific
          bequests, including amounts of $500, $250 and
          $100 to thirty-seven old employees, the residue
          of the estate goes to the next of kin, share and
          share alike. Col. Robert A. Hammond is one of the
          brothers.

          Col. Willard C. Ward, who drew the will on October
          1 last and filed it yesterday, said that he didn’t
          care to discuss the value of the estate, as he
          believed that the bequests indicated about what
          the value is. He wouldn’t give an opinion as to
          the value of the butterine business or how much of
          the estate will be left for the four brothers, two
          sisters, two nieces and a nephew after the bequests
          have been settled. The estate is believed to be
          worth at least $800,000, and probably $1,000,000,
          as Mr. Hammond is said to have owned much property
          in addition to his butterine business.

          Mr. Hammond leaves his entire holdings in the firm
          of Hammond & Person, of which he was practically
          the only stockholder, to three legatees. They are
          Miss Alice C. Hagan, daughter of a Jersey City
          policeman, who had been his private secretary for
          many years and was said to have been engaged to
          him; Dr. Oscar Bauer, his physician and one of
          the executors of the estate, and Henry C. Berger,
          superintendent of his butterine plant.

          One of the first bequests provides for the payment
          of $25,000 to Anna Louise Cooley of New York city
          as soon as possible. Of this amount $500 is to be
          paid at once and the balance at the rate of $100
          a month. Sarah B. Johnson and Mabel E. Wilkins of
          Jersey City, employees of the firm of Hammond &
          Person for many years, receive $1,500 each. Nellie
          P. Hamilton, a stenographer in the office of Col.
          Ward, who assisted in drawing the will, gets $250.
          Gertrude M. Burns, a daughter of Henry Burns of 314
          Devine avenue, Jersey City, where Mr. Hammond lived
          for seventeen years, receives $500. John J. Jones,
          manager of Mr. Hammond’s butterine company, gets
          the shares in the American Butter, Cheese and Egg
          Company that were owned by Mr. Hammond. Concerning
          one of the bequests the will says:

            During several days’ illness in Chicago I was
            a patient in the Presbyterian Hospital, where
            I was faithfully nursed by the trained nurses.
            I desired to recognize the care I received at
            their hands. I therefore give and bequeath to the
            following members of the Illinois Training School
            for Nurses: Nellie G. Burke, $500; Minnie C.
            Phillips, $500; Jennie Van Horn, $1,500.

          This illness occurred about six years ago, when
          Mr. Hammond had typhoid fever. His physician, Dr.
          Bauer, was with him at the time, and was also ill.

          In making the bequests of from $500 to $100 to
          thirty-seven employees, who include men and women
          working both in the office and in the butterine
          plant, and truck drivers as well, the will says
          that they are remembered for their faithful
          services to the corporation of Hammond & Person.

          The will allows the executors five years in which
          to make payment of all the legacies, and the
          remainder of the property, real, personal and
          mixed, is bequeathed “to the next of kin and their
          survivors.” The relatives named are Robert A.
          Hammond of New York, and Samuel A., Frederick D.
          and Franklin A. Hammond of Pittsburg, brothers;
          Josephine Block of Greensburg, Pa., and Anna Emma
          Dell of Los Angeles, Cal., sisters; Paul Martin,
          nephew, and Gladys Brown and Madeline Martin,
          nieces, all of Pittsburg and children of Mr.
          Hammond’s deceased sister, Sadie Martin.

          The total cash bequests amount to $41,710, of which
          $10,460 goes to the thirty-seven employees named
          together.

          Col. Robert A. Hammond, who was in Jersey City most
          of the afternoon yesterday, said when he returned
          to his office at 16 Broadway that he was acquainted
          with the provisions of the will and had been at
          Col. Ward’s office during the afternoon. He said he
          was to see the will at 9 o’clock this morning, and
          was not aware that it had been admitted to probate.

          “No one has any cause for complaint over the
          will,” said Col. Hammond. “It was just what might
          have been expected from the fairest, smartest boy
          that ever walked the face of God’s green earth. No
          more generous chap ever lived than that boy, and if
          he had not remembered his employees as he has done
          it would have been most unlike him. His relatives
          do not begrudge the money he has left to those he
          chose to reward.

          “There has never been the slightest break in the
          cordial relationship between Walter and myself or
          between him and any other member of the family. All
          this talk that has come up since my brother’s death
          is pure foolishness. I am the oldest and the head
          of the family, and the relationship between Walter
          and me has been almost that of father and son. I
          gave him his first start in life when he was a boy.
          I have never asked anything from him or from any
          one else in my life and I do not ask it now.

          “Walter was the pleasantest, sunniest boy you ever
          knew. He did not sit at the right hand of Mr.
          Parkhurst, but nothing ever came up to smirch his
          record during his lifetime, and nothing will come
          up now that he is dead.

          “We are all sorry that our best brother was killed
          and our thoughts are not on the provisions of his
          will, but on seeing that the man who shot him down
          without giving him a chance for his life is made
          to suffer the full penalty of his act. My entire
          time from now on will be devoted to that purpose.
          There isn’t the slightest doubt that I will get my
          brother’s murderer. I haven’t been wasting any time
          since Walter’s death.

          “I know that the man who murdered my brother has
          been sleeping well every night and eating three
          square meals a day. I don’t propose to permit
          him to escape with an insanity plea. I have been
          going over the testimony of seventeen witnesses
          with the prosecutor and helping to get it into
          shape. My experience in that line makes me of some
          assistance, and I intend to see the prosecutor
          every day if necessary, in order that full justice
          may be done to my brother’s murder.”

          (2)

          _Chicago Evening Post_

          Three Chicago nurses came into their reward to-day
          for faithful services and devotion six years ago to
          Walter H. Hammond, a wealthy butterine manufacturer
          of Jersey City, who was shot dead on Nov. 17
          in that city by Peter Grew, who had a fancied
          grievance against him.

          Under the terms of his will, which was filed
          yesterday in Jersey City, $500 is bequeathed to
          Miss Nellie G. Burke, 981 Carroll avenue, a like
          sum to Miss Minnie C. Phillips, 14 Green Tree
          street, and $1,500 to Miss Jennie Van Horn of
          Chicago, who is now with a patient in Japan.

          While in the city on a business trip six years ago,
          Mr. Hammond was taken ill with typhoid fever at the
          Annex. His physicians, Dr. J. B. Herrick and Dr.
          Frank Billings, had difficulty in finding nurses
          who suited the patient. At length Miss Burke was
          sent for and placed in charge of the case, and she
          selected for her assistants Miss Phillips and Miss
          Van Horn.

          “I remember Mr. Hammond very well and the
          circumstances attending his illness,” said Miss
          Burke to-day. “He was seriously ill and for a long
          time it was a question as to his recovery. We made
          every effort to save him and felt a keen personal
          delight when we knew we had won. He had always, up
          to the time of his death, remembered all of us,
          sending us presents and flowers at the holidays and
          in many ways showing his deep gratitude.

          “We were notified by his secretary immediately
          after his death, but until to-day we had no idea
          that he had remembered us in his will. I had charge
          of his case two months and then had to take another
          patient. Miss Van Horn was with him five months
          during his convalescence.”

          In the little apartment at 14 Green Tree street
          there was a sound of laughing and dancing feet.
          Answering the ring of a visitor Miss Phillips
          opened the door with such a smiling countenance as
          to obliterate any memory of downcast skies.

          “I have just heard of Mr. Hammond’s great
          kindness,” she said. “Just think of $500; why it’s
          a nest egg for a fortune! He has always done so
          many nice things for us girls ever since we cared
          for him, but to think of his remembering us in his
          will! I was with him several months and we grew to
          be great friends after the crisis of his illness
          was past.

          “He often came to Chicago, and frequently would
          call us up on arriving and arrange for us all to
          go to the theater, or to dinner. He was by far the
          most grateful patient any of us has ever had.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUIT TO BREAK WILL

          _New York Herald_

          An effort to obtain approximately one-half of the
          bequest of about $2,000,000, left to Mrs. Carrie
          Chapman Catt for the promotion of the cause of
          woman suffrage, by the late Baroness de Bazus,
          who was Mrs. Frank Leslie, was begun in the
          Supreme Court yesterday by two step-grandchildren
          of the Baroness. They ask $400,000 each and
          allege that $200,000 is due to each of two other
          step-grandchildren.

          The plaintiffs in the two actions, which are
          brought through James H. Westcott, of No. 40 Wall
          street, are Mrs. Lonetta Leslie Hollander and Mrs.
          Florence Leslie Weissbrod. Both are grandchildren
          of Frank Leslie by his first wife, Mrs. Sarah Ann
          Welham Leslie. They allege that by an agreement
          made between the Baroness and Frank Leslie December
          1, 1879, she promised, in return for receiving his
          entire estate, to distribute by her will two-thirds
          of it among the children of his first wife or their
          heirs. This agreement, they allege, she entirely
          disregarded in the document which left the large
          residuary estate to Mrs. Catt.

          William Nelson Cromwell and Louis H. Cramer,
          executors of the estate of the Baroness, are the
          defendants in both actions.

          Frank Leslie was born in 1821 and in 1854
          established the publishing business which at one
          time issued thirteen periodicals. In 1841 he
          married Miss Sarah Ann Welham. There were three
          children by the marriage, Frank Leslie, 2d; Alfred
          A. Leslie and Scipio L. Leslie. Mrs. Hollander
          is the only child of Scipio L. Leslie, who was
          married in June, 1875, and died in February, 1879.
          Mrs. Weissbrod is the only child of the late Frank
          Leslie, 2d, who was married January 5, 1874. Alfred
          A. Leslie, who was married in August, 1868, and
          died in August, 1905, had two children, Frank
          Leslie, 3d, and Arthur Leslie.

          Following the death of his first wife, Frank Leslie
          married the Baroness May 1, 1875. She was then Mrs.
          Miriam Florence Peacock Squires. Her first husband
          was David Peacock, her second Ephraim G. Squires.
          There were no children by any of her marriages.
          Before her marriage the Baroness had been employed
          in the publishing business of Frank Leslie. She was
          born in 1828 and entered his employ in 1860. Her
          maiden name was Miriam Florence Follin.

          Frank Leslie became financially involved about
          September 8, 1877, according to the two complaints
          now on file. It is alleged that he assigned the
          greater part of his property March 20, 1879, to
          Isaac W. England for the benefit of his creditors
          under an agreement whereby he was to receive the
          property back again in three years if the business
          had succeeded in clearing all indebtedness. It is
          said that the business did not clear the debts but
          that Mr. Leslie died before the property could be
          returned.

          Mr. Leslie also agreed with his wife, it is said,
          to leave his entire estate to her on the condition
          that she would use the income and dispose of the
          principal in her will as follows:--One-third in
          any way she desired; one-third of the remaining
          two-thirds to each of the three children of Frank
          Leslie by his first wife or to their issue.

          The complaints allege that the Baroness received
          everything which she possessed from Frank Leslie,
          who died leaving about $1,000,000. This was
          increased by her to at least $1,800,000, it is
          said. The plaintiffs do not ask that the agreement,
          which is not produced in connection with the
          complaint, be fulfilled. They seek instead
          $400,000 each as damages and allege that $200,000
          is due also to Frank Leslie, 3d and Arthur Leslie.

          *       *       *       *       *

          WILL

          _Springfield Republican_

          The bequest of a bit of the wool of Mary’s lamb to
          the Somerville historical society in the will of
          Mrs P. H. Derby, which was entered in the probate
          court in this city yesterday, brings to light the
          interesting information that the nursery jingle,
          “Mary had a little lamb, its fleece was white as
          snow,” had a basis in fact. The piece of wool in
          question was given to Mrs Derby in 1880 by Mrs Mary
          E. Tyler, the original of the little lamb jingle.
          It is a piece of yarn tied in a bow and fastened
          on a piece of paper with pale blue ribbon. Under
          it is written the words, “wool from Mary’s lamb.”
          It seems that when the Old South church of Boston
          became involved financially one of the ways hit
          upon to raise money was suggested by Mrs Tyler. She
          took a pair of old wool stockings that her mother
          had knit for her from the wool of her pet lamb,
          and that she had never worn, but kept in memory of
          the departed lamb. These were cut up into lengths
          and made into bows, like the one that was in the
          possession of Mrs Derby, and sold for 25 cents
          each. The result was that $200 was realized, and
          thus the little lamb helped to save the Old South
          church.

          The story of Mary and her lamb is authenticated and
          the incidents bear a close relation to the events
          of the poem, or rather, jingle. Mary E. Sawyer was
          born in Sterling, March 22, 1806, and the house
          in which she was born is still standing. She had
          two sisters and four brothers, none of whom ever
          had themselves immortalized in rhyme as Mary did.
          Mary’s father was a farmer and kept sheep. One
          cold morning in March, 1814, just about 100 years
          ago and one year over, twin lambs were born in
          the Sawyer sheepfold one of which was to be known
          in nursery rhyme for time immemorial. Like all
          geniuses, she--for it was a girl--displayed the
          vagaries of it before she was many hours old. So
          much so in fact that her mother would have nothing
          of her. Little Mary, age eight, took pity on the
          young thing and asked her father if she might have
          it, not thinking of the greatness that would come
          of this charitable deed. She fed and tended it, and
          the two became very fond of one another.

          It was but natural that the lamb should in time
          come to have a thirst for knowledge, and, as the
          first stanza of the jingle has it, “It followed
          her to school one day,” “Which,” we are told, “was
          against the rule,” and, as might be expected, “it
          made the children laugh and play, to see a lamb at
          school.” It seems that the teacher laughed too, and
          everything was lovely for a time. But discipline
          had to be maintained, and:--

            So then the teacher turned it out,
              But still it lingered near,
            And waited patiently about
              Till Mary did appear.

          All of which is strictly true to fact. It appears
          that when Mary arrived at the school the teacher
          had not come yet and so the mischievous Mary hid
          the pet in her desk, which was a box-like affair.
          When school began and the children were called out
          for their classes, the lamb trotted out to have a
          hand in the proceedings. And this, alas, caused it
          to be put without the pale.

          Now it happened, so strange are the immutable
          workings of fate, that a young man of 17, a
          freshman at Harvard, by the name of John Roulstone,
          Jr., was visiting the teacher at the school that
          day. The incident inspired him, and a short time
          after he wrote and sent to Mary the jingle that is
          so well known. The ideal way to have the thing work
          out would have been the marriage of Mary and the
          budding genius. But no, he died a few years later,
          never having seen Mary again, so far as there is
          any record.

          The strain of being a celebrity was too much for
          the lamb and after bearing up bravely under it
          for two years it gave up the struggle, got in the
          way of a bull on Thanksgiving day, 1816, and was
          gored. It died an hour later, with its head on
          Mary’s lap.

          In 1835 Mary was married to Columbus Tyler,
          superintendent of the McClean hospital for the
          insane at Somerville. She became a matron at the
          institution, a position she held for 35 years, and
          several years after her husband died. She died
          in Somerville, December 12, 1889, and was buried
          in the Mt Auburn cemetery, near Boston, the same
          cemetery in which the poet, Longfellow, is buried.
          The glowing example of what happened to Mary ought
          to inspire little children to be kind to dumb
          beasts that they too may some time taste the fruits
          of immortality.

          Besides the lamb’s wool bequest, Mrs Derby left
          the following legacies to various charitable
          institutions: Springfield branch of the woman’s
          board of missions, $300; Norton memorial fund
          of the same organization, $200; Congregational
          women’s home mission society of Massachusetts,
          $300; trustees of the national council of the
          Congregational churches of the United States,
          $3000, to be applied to ministerial relief;
          Massachusetts society for the prevention of cruelty
          to animals, $200. Certain books from Mrs Derby’s
          library are bequeathed to the Springfield city
          library association and the remainder of the estate
          is to be divided equally between her two nephews,
          Dr Edward C. Booth of Somerville and Harry D. Booth
          of Albany, Ill. Charles A. Gleason is named as
          executor without bond.

       *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_How the same piece of news may be treated in
          different ways is illustrated in the following two
          stories._

          VALUE OF AN ESTATE

          (1)

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Doubtless Michael Kennedy’s schooling never
          progressed to the point where he reaped the
          manifold intellectual bounties of McGuffy’s second
          reader. That venerable text book explains school
          ma’ams. Their purpose is to teach the young idea to
          shoot, it says.

          Consequently there were those who believed Michael
          misguided when he opened up his shooting gallery
          in a basement on North Clark street near West
          Erie street. There Mike--for the consideration
          of 5 cents for five shots--taught the young idea
          marksmanship after a fashion of his own.

          “Mike, the ne’er-do-well,” they called him for
          years. But a smile was Mike’s only answer. He
          went right on loading rifles for whoever came and
          painting out the bullet marks on the white targets
          in the gallery.

          On May 23, 1913, Mike died. Public Administrator
          James F. Bishop took charge of the estate, hoping
          he would get enough out of it to bury the target
          tender. Mr. Bishop was surprised when he found
          that Mike, the “ne’er-do-well,” had a snug bank
          account--some $400.

          Another surprise came yesterday when Administrator
          Bishop announced the result of his seventeen
          months’ investigation into Mike’s affairs. It was
          learned that the “ne’er-do-well” left a nephew in
          Blackburne, Lancashire, England, named as his sole
          heir. In a safety deposit vault Mike had $42,000
          worth of bonds--the products of teaching the young
          idea to shoot.

          (2)

          _Chicago Herald_

          “Mike” was a shiftless guy. Any of the bunch would
          tell you that. Of course he always had money. But
          then, too, he was always giving it away. He’d lend
          you anything he had if he knew you, and many’s the
          “bo” who got the price of a bed from him.

          Mike at one time was known as Michael Kennedy, but
          that was not during the time he kept the shooting
          gallery in North Clark street. He was a rough
          fellow, and not very affable with strangers. But
          he’d go a long way for a pal.

          He had his place of business in a basement room.
          He slept there, and entertained his friends there
          when not busy loading rifles for his patrons. And
          everybody said that he could have a good home if
          he were not so shiftless.

          Well, “Mike” died a year ago last May, and it was
          found he had $400 in the bank. The county buried
          him and charged $106.75 to his estate. The fellows
          he had befriended went to the funeral and said “We
          told you so.” But they agreed that Mike was a good
          fellow.

          Public Administrator James F. Bishop was appointed
          to take care of the shooting gallery owner’s
          estate. He started an investigation.

          He discovered that Kennedy had a nephew in
          Blackburne, Lancashire, England, and that
          the shiftless, open-hearted, free-handed
          “ne’er-do-well” had just a little over $42,000
          worth of gilt-edged stocks and bonds in a safety
          deposit vault in the Masonic Temple.

          The amount was turned over to the nephew, James
          Kennedy, yesterday.




CHAPTER VI

INVESTIGATIONS, LEGISLATION, AND MEETINGS


=Type of story.= News stories of various kinds of meetings
constitute a distinct class. In the term “meeting” are included
sessions of state legislatures, meetings of municipal councils,
conventions of various organizations, and meetings of local societies.
Investigations and hearings as conducted by committees of legislative
bodies are also placed in this class, although they are often more like
judicial proceedings.

The purely informative type of story is the common form for reporting
meetings, investigations, and hearings. The parts of the proceedings
that are of general interest and significance make up the contents
of such stories (cf. “State Legislature,” p. 116, and “Meeting of
Safety Council,” p. 120). In meetings of some importance are to be
found humorous or pathetic phases that may be brought out legitimately
to heighten the interest and to emphasize the significance of the
proceedings (cf. “Hearing on Proposed Ordinance,” p. 113, and
“Testimony in Investigation,” p. 110). Some meetings lend themselves to
humorous treatment, and when the news interest in them is slight, such
stories about them constitute typical human interest stories (cf. “Old
Clothes Men’s Meeting,” p. 122).

=Purpose.= To give the facts accurately and as completely as their
significance warrants should be the first aim in reporting proceedings
of official bodies, because, like court proceedings, they are matters
of public concern. The desire to accomplish some end, no matter how
laudable that end may be, does not justify distortion or suppression
of the news of the doings of official bodies. A constructive purpose,
such as that of exposing sinister influences that may be affecting
legislative action, is entirely justifiable, but distortion or
suppression of facts in order to make out a stronger case is not
legitimate and should not be necessary. Politically partisan news
stories that misrepresent public matters in order to create opinion
favorable to the cause that the paper upholds, whether they be reports
of official proceedings or of political campaign meetings, not only
hurt the reputation of the newspaper that publishes them but tend to
cast doubt on the truthfulness of newspapers generally.

Much more effort should be made by newspapers in this country to show
the significance of acts of representative public bodies, in relation
not only to the home and business interests of the individual reader,
but to the welfare of the community, the state, and the nation.
Intelligent interest in government on the part of the individual
citizen, which is generally recognized as absolutely essential to the
success of a democracy, can be more effectively created through the
news columns of the daily newspaper than by any other means.

=Treatment.= To make interesting what is often considered dry
and unattractive in proceedings of various public meetings, is the
chief problem in writing news stories concerning them. Simple, clear
explanation of the meaning of significant parts of the proceedings,
lively accounts of debate on various measures, and vivid description
of persons and scenes connected with them--all add to the interest of
the stories. Too often, however, insignificant incidents of casual
interest are played up as features of meetings of importance to the
subordination or even to the exclusion of matters of vital concern.

Testimony in investigations and hearings sometimes has dramatic phases
like that in court trials. The questions and the answers in these
proceedings are handled like those in court stories, and testimony is
dealt with in much the same manner (cf. “Congressional Investigation,”
p. 109 and “Testimony in Investigation,” p. 110).

To select the vital matters, to present them concisely, and to condense
routine but necessary details into the smallest possible compass in
stories of this class, require effort and skill.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The following two stories give
          the results of the first two days’ work in the
          investigation of conditions growing out of a coal
          strike. Both were sent by the Associated Press._

          CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION

          (1)

          _Chicago Inter Ocean_

          CHARLESTON, W. Va., June 10.--The power and
          authority of the government of the United States
          came to West Virginia today to determine who is
          responsible for the conditions which have kept the
          state in virtual civil war for more than a year.

          Opening the investigation of the coal mine strike,
          which has dealt death and destruction in the Paint
          Creek and Cabin Creek mining sections, the Senate
          mine strike investigating committee tonight called
          upon the military authorities for the records of
          the proceedings prior to, and under the declaration
          of, martial law in the strike territory.

          Judge Advocate General George S. Wallace, Adjutant
          General Charles D. Elliott, Major James I. Pratt,
          Captain Charles R. Morgan and Captain Samuel L.
          Walker were summoned before the committee this
          evening, to produce the state records regarding
          the declaration of martial law and the proceedings
          of the military committee which was placed in
          authority in the strike district.

          Senator Borah of Idaho desired their testimony and
          their records as a basis for the branch of the
          inquiry which he is conducting, as to the charge
          that citizens have been “arrested, tried and
          convicted in violation of the Constitution or the
          law of the United States.”

          Opening his case under the section of the Senate
          resolution authorizing the investigation which
          directs an inquiry into this subject, Senator
          Borah, at a brief session of the committee this
          afternoon, read into the record several excerpts
          from the constitution of West Virginia. The first
          was the provision declaring that the constitution
          of the state and of the United States shall always
          be in effect. The second provision declared, under
          no circumstances shall the right of habeas corpus
          be denied.

          The third was the usual provision that no citizen
          shall be deprived of life, liberty or property
          without due process of law. The fourth set forth
          that the military authority shall not supersede the
          civil powers, even under the plea of necessity, and
          others provided for trial by jury in open court for
          all criminal offenses.

          The activities of the state authorities in
          connection with the strike will be probed by
          the committee, in view of these constitutional
          guarantees, and the charge that the mine workers
          have not been accorded their full rights will be
          investigated with these provisions in mind.

          A formidable array of counsel was on hand. For the
          miners there appeared Frank S. Monnet, formerly
          attorney general of Ohio, Seymour Stedman of
          Illinois, and M. M. Belcher and H. W. Houston. The
          operators were represented by Z. T. Vinson, E.
          W. Knight and C. C. Watts, with a half score of
          assistants.

          Two lengthy preliminary statements were filed with
          the committee by the attorneys for the operators.
          The first was filed by Mr. Vinson for the operators
          generally, and the second by Mr. Watts for the
          Paint Creek Collieries company. Both were pleas of
          “not guilty” and both denied in detail and in toto
          the charges made in the resolution passed by the
          Senate authorizing the inquiry.

          The operators in their brief made the counter
          charge that the United Mine Workers of America,
          in its attempts “to organize” the coal miners in
          the West Virginia field, was responsible for the
          violence which has characterized the strike.

          The operators declared they expect to prove that
          firearms and ammunition were brought into the state
          “for acts of lawlessness and violence, which were
          designed to keep the Paint Creek and Cabin Creek
          mines idle and prevent shipments of coal therefrom
          until the United Mine Workers of America should be
          recognized.”

          The statement presented by the Paint Creek
          Collieries company made similar denials and similar
          charges.

          Former Governor Glasscock, who was Governor when
          the strike began and who declared martial law in
          the district, will appear before the committee
          on Thursday. He sent a telegram to the committee
          today offering to testify, and at the suggestion
          of Senator Borah it was arranged to examine him on
          Thursday.

          *       *       *       *       *

          (2)

          _Chicago Inter Ocean_

          CHARLESTON, W. Va., June 11.--War time rule in the
          coal strike regions of West Virginia was described
          before the Senate mine investigating committee
          here today, and after three military officers had
          told of conditions, the committee expressed itself
          as satisfied as to the charge that “the citizens
          of West Virginia had been tried and convicted in
          violation of the Constitution and laws of the
          United States.”

          Two members of the military committee, which
          at three different times have assumed absolute
          dominion over some 150 square miles of West
          Virginia territory, testified. They were Captain
          Charles R. Morgan, a lawyer, and Major James I.
          Pratt, who was president of the second military
          court which took charge of the strike district.
          Both told the committee that their proceedings
          were conducted without regard to the civil laws
          of the state; that they arrested, arraigned,
          tried, convicted and sentenced offenders without
          recourse to civil courts and without regard to
          the limitations imposed by the statutes of West
          Virginia.

          “We considered that the strike district was in a
          state of actual warfare,” said Captain Morgan, “and
          we acted according to the procedure of the United
          States Army in time of war.”

          “But the constitution of the state provides,”
          interjected Attorney Monnet, for the miners, “that
          the military shall be subordinate to the civil
          power, and that no citizen, unless engaged in
          military service of the state, shall be tried or
          punished for any offense that is cognizable by the
          civil courts of the state.”

          “My understanding was,” replied Captain Morgan,
          “that during the state of insurrection which
          prevailed, the constitution of the state of West
          Virginia was suspended by the acts of those men who
          were burning, killing and destroying property.

          “We believed that to perpetuate the state of West
          Virginia and restore the constitution was to use
          extreme measures.”

          A dozen pictures of men clad in prison clothing
          were identified by Major Pratt as those of men who
          had been sentenced by the military commission. One
          man was given a sentence of seven and a half years;
          several others were given three, four and five year
          terms.

          “Was there any indictment against these men?” asked
          Senator Borah.

          “No,” answered Major Pratt; “they were arraigned on
          charges prepared by the judge advocate general.”

          Senator Borah elicited that Captain Morgan, as a
          lawyer, believed that there was no appeal from the
          decision of the commission, if approved by the
          Governor, except to the Supreme court of the United
          States.

          “Then a man did not have to commit a statutory
          offense to make himself amenable to the action of
          your commission?” asked Attorney Monnet.

          “No.”

          “You could arraign him for anything that in your
          estimation was an offense?”

          “Yes, except that the Governor’s proclamation
          specified statutory offenses.”

          Senator Martine ascertained that after the
          commission had heard the testimony in a case it
          went into secret session, executed sealed findings
          after the manner of a verdict, and sent them to the
          Governor. It was developed that forty-nine accused
          men were tried at one time by the commission.

          “There was no opportunity given a man to secure a
          new trial, or bail, no possibility of a stay of
          execution; your decision was final,” suggested Mr.
          Monnet.

          “Yes.”

          “If you had sentenced a man to death, there was no
          way of stopping the execution?” asked Senator Borah.

          “We did not contemplate imposing death sentences,”
          replied the witness.

          Adjutant General Charles D. Elliott occupied the
          morning session and part of the afternoon session.
          Tonight Senator Borah took up witnesses produced
          by the Mine Workers to testify as to charges that
          peonage obtains in the Paint and Cabin creeks
          sections. A hundred brawny miners came in from the
          hills today, and the attorneys for the Mine Workers
          weeded out the witnesses they wanted to call.

          Following today’s speedy work, the committee
          decided to divide up the inquiry tomorrow, allowing
          Senator Borah to proceed alone with the peonage
          investigation, and probably requiring Senator
          Kenyon to begin an individual inquiry into general
          conditions in the strike zone, while the remainder
          of the committee take up other branches of the
          inquiry.

          *       *       *       *       *

          TESTIMONY IN INVESTIGATION

          _Milwaukee Free Press_

          NEW YORK, Feb. 3.--Mrs. Mary Petrucci, a coal
          miner’s wife, today told the federal industrial
          commission how her three small children met death
          at her side in the Ludlow strike massacre of 1914.

          Women wept and tense faced men bent forward
          eagerly, as the bareheaded, black clad woman, in
          low, passive tones, reflecting the deep melancholy
          of her face, recited the dramatic events of the
          night of April 20, when fire and machine guns swept
          the strikers’ camp in the southern Colorado hills,
          collecting a toll of twelve children, two women
          and five men. It was a remarkable recital and a
          memorable scene.

          Mrs. Petrucci is 24 years old. She was born of
          Italian parents in a Colorado mining camp. She was
          married at the age of 16 and had four children when
          the strike of the Colorado Fuel & Iron company
          employes was declared in 1913. She lost one child
          in March of the following year as a result of
          privations occasioned by the strike. With the grief
          of that loss still upon her she went to live in the
          tent colony at Ludlow after the strikers had been
          driven from the company settlement. There the final
          tragedy of her life was enacted.

          She took the witness stand today with listless
          manner and haunted eyes. Throughout her testimony
          she alternately bit at her finger nails and twisted
          in her frail hands a cotton handkerchief.

          Her sweet voice at no time rose above a
          conversational tone, and the matter of fact manner
          in which she told the story of her grief served
          only to bring out with more striking force its
          tragic import.

          “Yes,” she said in answer to Chairman Walsh’s
          questions, “we had good times in the tent colony.
          I liked it there better than in the company camp.
          Over there the militia came up every day and
          insulted us. The Sunday before the fire was the
          Greek Easter. The men in the camp celebrated it.
          We had a baseball game, and that night there was
          singing, and the boys came with banjos and we had a
          good time.”

          Into this background of merriment she fitted the
          picture of the woe that followed.

          “April 20 I didn’t leave our tent at all,” she
          said. “Our tent was No. 1, and right behind it was
          the maternity tent. A cellar had been dug in that
          tent and there several babies were born while we
          lived in the colony. We also had a cellar in our
          tent. It was about 6 o’clock that night. I was
          down in the cellar and smelled a fire. The children
          were playing around. I went up and discovered that
          the tent was all on fire. I seized my children, and
          taking one in my arms, I got another by the hand,
          and the other one took hold of my skirt and we ran
          out of the tent.

          “When I ran out I saw a lot of the militiamen
          around. They hollered to me to look out and were
          shooting at me as I ran. As quick as I could I ran
          into the maternity tent and down the steps into the
          cellar.”

          “You are sure you saw the militiamen,” asked Mr.
          Walsh.

          “Oh yes, sir,” replied the witness. “They were
          about twenty-five yards away.”

          “And could they see you?”

          “I saw them. And they hollered at me; yes, sir.”

          She looked at Walsh with frightened eyes as if
          recalling in her mind the scene of the night and
          continued:

          “There was a door down to the cellar inside the
          tent and there were earth steps. The door was left
          open as I went down, and I don’t know how it came
          to be closed later. When I got down in the cellar
          there were three women and eight children there. I
          knew them all. I had my baby in my arms. It was six
          months old. The others were close to me and my boy
          had hold of my dress.”

          Twirling the handkerchief in her hands, the woman
          looked over at Mr. Walsh and in a voice from which
          all emotion seemed to have been drained, she said:

          “He would have been 5 years old yesterday--my boy.”

          “You lost all three of your children there?” said
          Walsh.

          “Yes, sir,” she replied, soft and low. “I lost them
          that night.”

          And again she twisted the handkerchief into a knot.
          A woman on the front row of benches sobbed audibly.
          A shuffling of feet and the deep breathing of the
          spectators swept over the room. Mrs. Petrucci gazed
          dully at her questioner.

          “We were in the cellar about ten minutes,” she
          said, “when the tent over our head took fire. I
          don’t know how it started. It was not on fire
          when I went in. Pretty soon after that we all lost
          consciousness.”

          “But before that,” asked Walsh, “didn’t you try to
          escape?”

          “It was all on fire over our heads,” replied the
          woman simply.

          “Did you do anything to save your children?”

          “What could I? Oh, yes. There was a woman there
          with a blanket. I asked her to share it with me
          for my babies; one was 6 months, you know, and the
          other 2½ years, and my boy 4. She told me it was
          only big enough for herself.”

          Mrs. Petrucci sighed. It was the only display
          of emotion she made during the recital. That
          blanket--a corner of it might have saved one of the
          babies from the suffocation that quickly overtook
          all there. She sighed at the recollection.

          “The next I knew,” she continued plaintively, “was
          when I woke up at 5 the next morning. I ran out
          for water for my babies. They were lying there. I
          thought water would help them. I did not know what
          I was doing. I felt like I was drunk. Outside I saw
          guards walking down the railroad tracks. They were
          laughing. I kept turning back all the time. I was
          afraid they would shoot me.”

          Again the frightened look came into her dark
          ringed, black eyes. A score of women in the
          audience were weeping now. Save for their smothered
          sighs the room was in absolute silence. The
          clanging of a bell on one of the lower floors of
          the Metropolitan building rang out like a funeral
          note.

          “I went to the railroad station,” said Mrs.
          Petrucci. “I didn’t know what I was doing. I asked
          Mrs. Horning to go look for my babies. She said she
          could not find them. Someone bought me a ticket
          for Trinidad. I was in bed there nine days with
          pneumonia. I did not see my children again.”

          A woman on the front row groaned and Mrs. Petrucci
          looked down at her with dazed eyes.

          “Don’t you know how the fire started?” asked
          Commissioner Weinstock.

          “No, sir; the beginning of the fire was in my tent.
          It was about 6 o’clock. It was still light. It
          started outside.”

          “But when you went out didn’t you see anyone?”

          “No, sir, only the militiamen.”

          For a full two minutes the commissioners gazed
          silently at the woman. Then finally Weinstock asked:

          “When you went to the railroad station what did you
          think had become of your children?”

          “I wasn’t thinking of anything,” replied Mrs.
          Petrucci, clasping her handkerchief to her breast.

          Mother Jones took the woman in her arms as she
          stepped from the stand and led her away.

          Andrew Carnegie will probably be called on Friday.

          *       *       *       *       *

          HEARING ON CITY ORDINANCE

          _New York Herald_

          If there is any general opposition to an ordinance
          to guard the public against the nuisance of smoking
          automobiles, it failed to develop at a public
          hearing in the matter held yesterday afternoon by
          the Committee on Laws and Legislation of the Board
          of Aldermen. One man appeared when opponents of
          the bill were asked to express their views, but he
          admitted that the ordinance would be a good thing
          if operative only in Manhattan.

          He was Herbert G. Andrews, of the Committee on
          Laws and Legislation of the Long Island Automobile
          Club. He said the club favored the abatement of
          the nuisance, but would like to have the ordinance
          altered in certain respects.

          In the form introduced by Alderman Nicoll the
          ordinance is identically the same as one now in
          force prohibiting smoking automobiles in the parks.
          It says that “no person shall run a motor vehicle
          in the streets and highways of the city of New York
          which emits from the exhaust or muffler thereof
          offensive quantities of smoke, gas or disagreeable
          odors,” and that “any violation of the provisions
          of this ordinance shall be deemed a minor offence
          and, upon conviction thereof before a city
          magistrate, shall be punished by a fine of not more
          than $10 or by imprisonment in the City Prison, or
          by both; but no such imprisonment, however, shall
          exceed a term of five days.”

          Mr. Andrews suggested that the word “offensive”
          be changed to “excessive” and that the fine be
          graduated--slight for the first offence and heavier
          for subsequent offences.

          William H. Palmer, of the New York Transportation
          Company, a taxicab concern, said that it would be
          easier to determine the offence if the ordinance
          made some reference to the distance at which smoke
          extending from an automobile was unlawful.

          In support of the bill there appeared many persons,
          including two women. Alderman Nicoll said that
          smoking automobiles were the cause of a great blue
          haze often to be found at places such as Columbus
          Circle and Forty-second street and Fifth avenue.
          The smoke penetrated stores, he said, and made it
          necessary for merchants to keep their doors and
          windows closed to protect their goods.

          The alderman told of riding in a taxicab from
          Cortlandt street to Fiftieth street on Thursday
          afternoon and of passing one hundred and sixty-four
          automobiles, of which, he said, thirty were smoking.

          Paris, London and Berlin have laws prohibiting the
          emission of smoke from automobiles, he said, and
          the law in force in Paris is even more drastic than
          his ordinance.

          Dr. Holbrook Curtis corroborated Mr. Nicoll in his
          claim that smoke had a bad effect on the health
          of the people who inhaled the fumes. He said it
          was especially injurious to persons suffering from
          gastritis.

          Mrs. John Rogers, as chairman of the Hygiene
          Committee of the New York City Federation of
          Women’s Clubs, pleaded for the passage of the
          ordinance for the sake of little children, whose
          noses and eyes were affected by the smoke, she
          said. Mrs. Katherine S. Day, of the Women’s
          Municipal League, also urged the passage of the
          measure.

          Others who spoke in favor of the measure were
          Charles J. Campbell, counsel for the Hotel
          Association of the City of New York; Frederick G.
          Cook, president of the Fifth Avenue Association;
          John C. Coleman, of the West End Association, and
          William Kirkpatrick.

          Mr. Coleman said that on the upper west side
          chauffeurs often vie with one another to see how
          much smoke they can emit and how much noise they
          can make.

          The claim was made that the emission of smoke
          could be prevented without difficulty, and nobody
          contradicted the statement. Taxicabs were said to
          be the worst offenders.

          *       *       *       *       *

          HEARING ON PROPOSED ORDINANCE

          _New York Times_

          Nearly 500 persons living in New York who raise
          chickens on their fire escapes, in their backyards,
          or on vacant lots, for eating purposes or for their
          eggs, went by invitation to the offices of the
          Department of Health yesterday afternoon and made
          a mighty protest against the proposed ordinance to
          prohibit the raising of hens within seventy-five
          feet of the nearest residence or public building,
          and the keeping of roosters anywhere.

          Their complaints against the hardships of the
          regulations under consideration were heard with
          great patience by Dr. Haven Emerson, Deputy
          Commissioner of Health, in charge of the Sanitary
          Bureau. Dr. Emerson had difficulty in keeping order
          at the meeting, because all the chicken owners were
          disposed to talk at once. On this account, too,
          many of those who probably had good arguments to
          use against the tentative ordinance were unable to
          get a hearing.

          The lecture room on the fifth floor of the
          Department of Health Building was packed with
          chicken owners long before 4 o’clock, when the
          meeting was called to order by Dr. Emerson. The
          gathering was composed of every kind of chicken
          raiser, from the head of a family which kept
          just two pullets for their eggs, to the fancier
          who boasted of the finest breed of fowl in large
          numbers. Seated on either side of Dr. Emerson
          were several members of his staff, including Dr.
          John Barry, Assistant Sanitary Superintendent of
          Queens, and Dr. John Sprague, Assistant Sanitary
          Superintendent of Richmond.

          The meeting was opened by Dr. Emerson, who
          explained that the Sanitary Bureau had received
          more than 14,000 complaints on account of chickens
          since the first of the year. Furthermore, he
          asserted that inspectors were occupied one-third of
          their time investigating applications for permits
          to keep chickens, or complaints about them. He then
          started to read some of the hundreds of letters of
          complaint on the subject of chickens, when one of
          the owners interrupted:

          “I don’t think it’s fair to take up our time with
          letters of complaint, because we already know
          what’s in them. We want to find out what’s the
          best the Department of Health can do for chicken
          raisers.”

          A member of a delegation from Sheepshead Bay said
          that the proposed seventy-five-foot limit would
          entirely wipe out chicken raising in his section,
          and he believed it would have the same effect in
          other suburban districts. He said:

          “I have a plot 100 by 100 feet, and my house
          is constructed so that it would be impossible
          for me to keep chickens in accordance with the
          seventy-five-foot limit. The average suburbanite
          lives on a plot 50 by 100 feet.”

          The suggestion that the new limit would practically
          eliminate the chicken industry from this city,
          brought forth a chorus of groans not unlike that
          of Sing Sing when a convict is led from the death
          house to the electric chair.

          Dr. Emerson was the target for a score of different
          questions from every part of the room, and, as the
          best way out of the difficulty, he asked all who
          had killed chickens on their plots to raise their
          hands.

          “Don’t you do it; you’ll be fined,” was the warning
          shouted by one of the chicken owners, and this was
          the signal for another series of groans.

          It took the Deputy Health Commissioner some little
          time to restore order and to explain to the men
          and women that no police officers were present
          to start proceedings against offenders of the
          anti-chicken-slaughtering regulations.

          One of the chicken raisers pointed out that the
          law was absurd in that it said that a chicken coop
          could not be kept within seventy-five feet of a
          factory.

          “Is a chicken going to harm a factory?” he asked.

          Dr. Emerson then tried to tell the complaining
          chicken owners that milk-bottling works, on
          the sanitation of which depended the lives of
          thousands of babies, were among the “factories”
          protected by the regulation. He also said that
          there was no intent in the seventy-five-foot limit
          to discriminate against chicken owners any more
          than there was to discriminate against saloons,
          which are required to be 200 feet removed from the
          nearest church or school. Here he was interrupted:

          “You see a lot of drunken men coming out of
          saloons, but you never see a drunken chicken coming
          out of a chicken coop.”

          When Dr. Emerson asserted that 150,000 chickens
          were slaughtered in New York City every year in
          violation of the law regulating slaughter houses,
          several men and women jumped to their feet. All at
          once the men protested:

          “But we slaughter them in a more sanitary way than
          the licensed slaughter houses.”

          When this period of excitement had somewhat
          subsided, a little woman arose quietly and, on the
          ground that she kept two chickens for their eggs,
          protested against further reference to the killing
          of fowls as “slaughter.”

          J. Howland Leavitt, Superintendent of Highways
          of Queens, endeavored to calm the chicken owners
          by assuring them that it must be the idea of the
          Department of Health to improve bad conditions
          without being too strict with those persons who
          complied with the health regulations.

          “For instance,” said Supt. Leavitt, “I keep
          chickens within sixty-five feet of a school house.
          They do not disturb any of my neighbors, and there
          has never been any complaint about them, to my
          knowledge.”

          “Have you ever received a permit to keep those
          chickens?” asked Dr. Emerson.

          “No,” replied Mr. Leavitt, and the chicken owners
          were forced to laugh--for the first time.

          On behalf of citizens of Queens and Richmond
          Boroughs in their districts, Aldermen Burden of
          Flushing and O’Rourke of Richmond made certain
          objections to the proposed ordinance. Alderman
          Burden said his constituents were satisfied with
          the present law, and only asked for adequate
          inspection. Alderman O’Rourke said it would be more
          in keeping with the Mayor’s policy to apply home
          rule to chickens and leave each Assistant Sanitary
          Superintendent with jurisdiction in his borough.

          The fears of the chicken raisers were somewhat
          allayed when Commissioner Emerson read a letter
          from one of their number suggesting a few
          modifications to the proposed ordinance. He took a
          vote on the suggestions and the majority indorsed
          them.

          Before the meeting was closed the chicken owners
          voted their thanks to Dr. Emerson for his patience
          in hearing their complaints.

          *       *       *       *       *

          HEARING BEFORE COMMITTEE

          _Chicago Herald_

          Are women less brave than men in time of danger?

          J. C. McDonnell, chief of the fire prevention
          bureau, precipitated the second chapter in the
          controversy yesterday when he appeared before
          the judiciary committee of the city council and
          reiterated his contention that public safety
          demanded the substitution of men for women ushers
          in Chicago theaters.

          “Women ushers are not as brave as men when danger
          comes,” he argued.

          “Experience has proved that statement purely
          theoretical and absolutely untrue,” responded the
          managers of playhouses which employ girl ushers.

          “Women ushers are all right to hand out programs
          and show patrons to seats, but that is all,” the
          fire prevention chief remarked.

          And thereby Armageddon was set down in the midst of
          the theatrical world.

          The first strategic move of the opposing
          forces--the girl ushers of Chicago-consisted in the
          organization of an effective fighting machine.

          “The Girl Ushers’ Anti-McDonnell League” it is
          called--and the name conceals little of the
          organization’s plans of procedure.

          “Our work is to us what other kinds of work are to
          other girls--our means of earning a livelihood,”
          said Miss Marie Donlan of the Princess Theater,
          chairman of the league. “To the assistant fire
          chief the change from women ushers to men would
          mean only the vindication of an idea. To us it
          would mean the loss of our positions.”

          The campaign contemplated by the league has no
          place in it for consideration of the feelings of
          the fire prevention head.

          “We shall ignore him with pleasure,” volunteered
          Miss Blanche Lamb, head usher of the Garrick.

          Here is the plan worked out by the members of the
          league’s impromptu war council: A petition will
          be prepared and presented to Mayor Harrison by
          a committee selected from the membership of the
          league. The petition will recite actual instances
          in which girls have proved their bravery “under
          fire.”

          New friends sprang to the defense of the young
          women at the council committee meeting. They were
          Aldermen Coughlin and Dempsey. The former cited the
          instance of the Iroquois Theater fire, when “men
          ushers failed to prevent terrible loss of life.”
          Alderman Dempsey said it would be wrong “to throw
          so many girls out of employment.”

          Girl ushers active in the new league include the
          Misses Eleanor Cline and Gertrude White of the
          Princess Theater, the Misses Lucile Perkins and
          Blanche Lamb of the Garrick, and the Misses T.
          Crowley, D. Dennis and G. Kennedy of Powers’.

          The council judiciary committee voted to defer
          action until after the managers of the theaters had
          been given an opportunity to be heard.

          Meanwhile--who are braver, girls or boys?

          Theatrical managers say girls.

          Assistant Chief McDonnell says boys.

          And you--?

          *       *       *       *       *

          STATE LEGISLATURE

          _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_

          JEFFERSON CITY, Jan. 21--Opposition of Democratic
          politicians in St. Louis to a reform of the Justice
          of the Peace system in the city developed in the
          House yesterday over a bill modeled along the lines
          of the Municipal Courts bill, which has three times
          been killed through the influence of politicians
          who sought to perpetuate the present system in the
          minor courts of St. Louis.

          William R. Handy, Democratic member from the
          Third District in St. Louis, yesterday succeeded
          in keeping the Justice of the Peace bill in the
          Committee on Municipal Corporations after the House
          had voted to request that committee to return the
          bill that it might be referred to the Committee on
          Justices of the Peace, to which it properly belongs.

          Handy is a member of the Municipal Corporations
          Committee, and with the bill in that committee, it
          is always under his eye, and he is in a position to
          have a voice in determining whether it shall ever
          be reported. Through many sessions Handy has fought
          to kill the municipal courts bill.

          The Justices of the Peace bill was introduced by
          John C. Harrison of St. Louis. Harrison is a lawyer
          and a former Justice of the Peace.

          His bill provides that Justices of the Peace shall
          be elected at large in St. Louis and that each
          shall have jurisdiction throughout the city. It
          places each Justice on a salary of $3000 a year and
          provides for a reduction in the number of Justices
          from 11 to 7. Each Justice, the bill provides, must
          be a licensed attorney.

          One clerk is provided for, to be elected by the
          Justices. There are to be such deputy clerks as
          are required. One Constable is provided for in the
          bill, his salary to be $2500 a year. Deputy clerks
          and Constables shall be paid $1800 a year each. In
          addition to his salary, the Constable is allowed
          2½ per cent of all amounts collected by him on
          execution.

          The bill does not require that all the justice
          courts shall be in one building, but provides that
          the Board of Aldermen shall provide suitable rooms
          and offices, which shall be centrally located.

          The bill is opposed by ward politicians, as was
          the Municipal Courts bill in previous sessions,
          for the reason that it would abolish many jobs
          of Constables and would break up the political
          organizations in the Justice of the Peace districts
          in St. Louis.

          Democrats are opposing it on the additional ground
          that under the present system the Democrats are
          able to elect some Justices and Constables, and
          they fear that, if such officers were elected at
          large, the Republicans would win all the jobs.

          The controlling motive of the opposition, however,
          is the danger of breaking up the organizations
          through which political bosses are able to reward
          faithful henchmen or get jobs for themselves.

          The requirement that a Justice must be a practicing
          attorney would end the present system, practiced
          in many of the districts in St. Louis, of ward
          politicians having themselves elected Justices of
          the Peace.

          Harrison’s bill was introduced a week ago. It
          was referred by Speaker Ross to the Municipal
          Corporations Committee, of which Handy is a member.
          Yesterday Harrison requested that it be taken
          from that committee and sent to the Committee on
          Justices of the Peace, of which he is a member.

          Handy objected. He said that he was opposed to
          having the bill in Harrison’s committee. Speaker
          Ross said that it was customary to refer a bill to
          any committee the member introducing it desired,
          but Representative James J. Blain made the point
          that Ross had no power to take the bill out of the
          Municipal Corporations Committee.

          Harrison then offered a motion that the committee
          be instructed to return the bill to the House.
          Blain objected to the form of the motion. He
          said that the committee should be requested, not
          instructed. Harrison changed his motion.

          The Municipal Corporations Committee met yesterday
          afternoon. Handy was present. The committee voted
          to refuse the request of the House and to retain
          possession of the bill. The only Democrats on
          the committee voting to return the bill were
          Representatives White of Cole County and O’Brien of
          Wayne County.

          Harrison said this morning that he would renew his
          motion and that he would ask that the House order
          the Municipal Corporations Committee to return the
          bill.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The second of the next two stories
          follows up the news of the introduction of an
          ordinance given in the first story._

          CITY COUNCIL MEETING

          (1)

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          (Condensed)

          Authority for the immediate erection of a two-track
          elevated railway from Front and Arch streets
          to Rhawn street, Holmesburg, is granted in an
          ordinance introduced in Common Council yesterday by
          Peter E. Costello, of the 45th Ward.

          Asserting that he had introduced the bill upon his
          own volition, Mr. Costello said that he did not
          even know whether it embraced the recommendations
          made by Director of City Transit Taylor for such
          a road. The people in the northeast want it, he
          said, and are certain that it will be a paying
          proposition. Republican Organization leaders are
          understood to be behind the measure. The bill
          relegates Director Taylor to second place in
          approval of the plans for the project. It provides
          that work shall be started within six months after
          the plans have been approved by the “Departments of
          Public Works and of City Transit.”

          Attention was called to the fact that the Costello
          ordinance, by clearing the way for the Philadelphia
          Rapid Transit to accept a Northeast “L” proposition
          by itself, might seriously hamper the projects of
          Director Taylor by eliminating one of the main
          features in the Taylor plans, which contemplate
          the new high-speed system as a unit. The deep
          significance of the ordinance, councilmanic
          observers said, lay in this fact.

          In accordance with the agreement between the city
          and the Rapid Transit Company, the latter has first
          refusal of the franchise. If within 90 days after
          passage of the ordinance that company does not
          indicate acceptance or rejection, the Mayor shall,
          by public advertisement, request tenders for the
          construction of the elevated and report the same
          to Councils, “to the end that the said new company
          or the city of Philadelphia may proceed with the
          construction of the same.”

          The company submitting the successful tender is
          given six months within which to present complete
          plans for approval to the Departments of Public
          Works and of City Transit. Within six months after
          approval of such plans actual work of construction
          must be started.

          In consideration of the franchise the company is
          to pay to the city 10 per cent. of its net profits
          in cash before any dividends are paid. The rate of
          fare is not to exceed 5 cents for a continuous ride.

          The road throughout is to have an overhead
          clearance of 14 feet above street grades. From
          Front and Arch streets to Frankford, the Costello
          route is declared to be the same as that laid down
          by Director Taylor.

          As provided in the ordinance, the route of the
          road is to be from Front and Arch streets, along
          Front street to Kensington avenue, along Kensington
          avenue to Frankford avenue, along Frankford avenue
          to Rhawn street.

          Stations are to be established at Front and Arch
          streets, at Noble street, Girard avenue and Berks
          street; along Kensington avenue between Somerset
          and Cambria streets, between Allegheny avenue and
          Westmoreland street and at or near Tioga and Adams
          streets; along Frankford avenue at Unity, Arrott,
          Bridge, Comly, Tyson and Rhawn streets.

          The road is to be operated by electricity or any
          power other than steam. The ordinance was referred
          to the Committee on Street Railways, of which
          Charles Seger is chairman and Mr. Costello a member.

          The announcement that an ordinance had been
          introduced for the construction of the Frankford
          elevated was a complete surprise to Director
          of Transit Taylor. He so told the audience he
          addressed last night at a mass-meeting in Tioga. He
          refused to discuss the matter at any length.

          “After I carefully study that ordinance,” he said,
          “and learn more about it, I will make a public
          statement. That will be tomorrow afternoon.”

          A resolution introduced by Select Councilman Harry
          J. Trainer, to grant permission for the use of the
          south side of Pier 16, South, for loading supplies
          by the American Commission for Relief in Belgium,
          was passed.

          An ordinance for a “curb market” on Marshall
          street, between Brown and Parrish streets, also was
          passed.

          A resolution providing for the extension of the
          Greenmount Cemetery, which recently passed Common
          Council, was objected to by William R. Rieber and,
          on motion of Louis Hutt, of the 29th Ward, was laid
          on the table.

          A resolution was passed providing for the extension
          of Fairmount Park by the addition of a plot of
          ground at Rittenhouse street and Wissahickon avenue.

          Resolutions were introduced providing for the
          appropriation of $26,000 for a bridge on Sherwood
          avenue over the east branch of Indian Run; for
          the opening of Beulah street from Shunk street to
          Oregon avenue, and Charles street from Bridge to
          Harrison streets; for an appropriation of $6500 for
          the improvement of Connell Park; for the opening
          of a playground and recreation centre between
          Frankford and Erie avenues, Venango street and
          the Pennsylvania railroad; and for $12,000 for the
          purchase of a Delaware wharf property on the south
          side of Pine street.

          A communication was received from the East
          Germantown Improvement Association, calling
          attention to the dangerous condition existing
          along York road by reason of the absence of
          properly paved sidewalks, and urging better police
          protection. A letter also was received from Judge
          Barratt, urging that the Sons of the Revolution be
          permitted to erect a bronze tablet to the memory of
          John Nixon in Independence Square.

          A plea also was received from the Mutual Beneficial
          and Protective Association of the Bureau of Water,
          requesting a 15 per cent. increase in salaries for
          employes now getting $1400 a year or less.

          Select Councilman George T. Conrade, of the 5th
          Ward, introduced a resolution granting the use of
          Washington Square for the proposed “mongrel” or
          “yellow dog” show, to be held on December 19.

          (2)

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          (Abridged)

          Opposition to Councilman Peter E. Costello’s
          ordinance proposing the early construction of
          an elevated railroad to Frankford, with the
          Philadelphia Rapid Transit Company receiving first
          preference as a building and operating company,
          was sounded yesterday by prominent councilmanic
          leaders, Republican Organization colleagues of Mr.
          Costello.

          In a joint statement setting forth that they had no
          knowledge of the Costello ordinance previous to its
          introduction last Thursday, Charles Seger, chairman
          of Councils’ Joint Committee on Street Railways,
          and John P. Connelly, chairman of Councils’ Finance
          Committee, declared themselves opposed to any
          ordinance which does not embrace transit facilities
          “on a broad basis” for the entire city.

          At the same time Director of City Transit A.
          Merritt Taylor, after an analysis of the Costello
          bill, issued a statement declaring that the
          passage of such an ordinance would be “an
          unthinkable betrayal of a public trust,” in that it
          would serve to defeat the plan of the department
          to connect every important section of the city
          with every other important section by high-speed
          lines for a single 5-cent fare. To hand over to
          any corporation at this juncture the Frankford
          “L,” said Director Taylor, would be to “give away
          the most effective lever which the people have to
          secure adequate rapid transit for Philadelphia.”

          Protest against the Costello plan was forthcoming
          from many sections of the city in letters, in
          telephone messages and in visits to Director Taylor
          from delegations of citizens. The Philadelphia Navy
          Yard led the way by sending a delegation, headed
          by G. H. Williams, chairman of the League Island
          Improvement Association, who declared against a
          “one-legged proposition of any kind” and in favor
          of transit development for all Philadelphia.
          This delegation pointed out that Costello’s bill
          contained no provision for transfers from the
          Frankford “L” and Market street “L” to Navy Yard
          lines, making necessary two 5-cent fares rather
          than the single 5-cent fare proposed under the
          Taylor plan.

          Adherents of the Taylor plan pointed out that the
          Costello ordinance provided for extension of the
          Frankford elevated from Bridge street, Frankford,
          the northern terminal of the Taylor elevated,
          to Rhawn street, in Holmesburg. This, it was
          pointed out, was a projection three miles long
          through an undeveloped territory, which, however,
          contains choice building lots now held by realty
          corporations and private owners.

          In the face of all the protest, Councilman Costello
          announced that Frankford, with one-third of the
          entire population of the city, was entitled to
          first consideration in transit development, and
          that it had been trying to get better facilities
          for 25 years. He said he was not considering the
          needs of Darby, Logan or any other section of the
          city. He did not care whether the Rapid Transit
          Company or an independent concern built and
          operated the line. Further, he had consulted no
          one in drafting his ordinance.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MEDICAL CONVENTION

          _New York Times_

          The man isn’t born who can tell a lie under the
          close observation of physiological experts without
          an increase in the pressure of the blood, according
          to a statement made by Dr. Louisa Burns of the A.
          T. Still Research Institute of Chicago, at the
          final meeting of the sixteenth Annual Convention
          of the New York Osteopathic Society, yesterday
          afternoon, at the Park Avenue Hotel, Park Avenue
          and Thirty-third Street. Dr. Burns has drawn her
          conclusions from a long series of experiments,
          conducted in her laboratory.

          It was pointed out to the three hundred osteopaths
          by Dr. Burns that any habitual liar could tell an
          untruth without betraying the slightest sign of
          deceit in the expression of his face or in the
          movement of his body. But the action of the pulse,
          she said, was far beyond the control even of the
          best liar. She explained that this was so because
          the pulse or pressure of the blood was influenced
          chiefly by the change of emotions, and the most
          finished liars, she observed, had sometimes the
          strongest emotions.

          “The action of the blood pressure is an indicator
          to the person who is accustomed to work with it. By
          watching it you are able to get the true history
          of a case, even in spite of the reticence of the
          patient, in the same way in which you are able to
          find a hidden object in the game of hide and seek,
          when your search is guided toward that hidden thing
          by the warning, ‘You’re getting hot,’ and away from
          it by the counter warning, ‘You’re getting cold.’

          “When a patient comes to my office I always find it
          is better to work with him as he lies on a table.
          In order to avoid distracting his attention, it is
          better to sit quietly beside him rather than stand
          over him. He is engaged in a conversation at first
          simply about the nature of his complaint. Meanwhile
          I have found his pulse, and as the conversation
          progresses, the patient soon forgets that his pulse
          is the one thing under observation. If the patient
          is asked about a certain thing which may have been
          true of his case, he will confirm your guess by the
          action of his pulse, even though he may evade your
          question. If he is trying to keep from disclosing
          this fact to you, the pressure of his blood will
          inevitably be increased.”

          Dr. Burns said that she was certain she could
          take a witness in a criminal case and find out
          absolutely to her own satisfaction whether he
          was telling the truth or lying. However, she
          would be unwilling to give testimony this way
          for conviction. Asked if a man of low mentality
          responded differently in the pressure of his blood
          from a man of higher mentality, Dr. Burns explained
          that he did, yet the truth and the lie were as
          easily distinguishable in one as in the other.

          The management of pneumonia, scarlet fever, and
          typhoid fever with technique was discussed by E.
          C. Link, D. O., Stamford, Conn.; G. V. Webster, D.
          O., Carthage; J. A. De Tienne, D. O., Brooklyn,
          and J. E. Foster, D. O., Butler, Penn. “Osteopathy
          and Acute Conditions,” was the subject of a paper
          by Dr. George M. Laughlin, M. S. D., D. O., of the
          American School of Osteopathy.

          These were elected officers of the society: W.
          A. Merkley, D. O., Brooklyn, President; Louisa
          Dieckmann, D. O., Buffalo, Vice President; C. M.
          Bancroft, D. O., Canandaigua, Secretary, and Cecil
          Rogers, D. O., New York, Treasurer.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MEETING OF SAFETY COUNCIL

          _Chicago Herald_

          There is one railroad company in the United States
          that has solved the difficulty presented by boys
          who delight in “flipping” cars and “milling”
          locomotive turntables at considerable risk to life
          and limbs.

          The remedy? Bribery, nothing less. Nicely embossed
          “Safety First” buttons, or, as a last and
          never failing resort, a swimming pool near the
          round-house.

          This revelation of latest railroad safety methods
          was made yesterday at the closing session of the
          third annual congress of the national council for
          industrial safety at the Hotel LaSalle, by W. B.
          Spaulding of St. Louis, chairman of the central
          safety committee of the Frisco System.

          “Every railroad has trouble with boys who ‘hop’ and
          ‘flip’ trains and play with the turntables,” said
          he. “I am glad to be able to report that the Frisco
          road has solved the problem with success, so far as
          we are concerned. We awarded ‘Safety’ buttons to
          those who swore off on these juvenile pastimes, and
          when that failed, we installed swimming pools near
          the roundhouses, under railroad supervision.

          “The swimming pool never has failed to work.
          All that is necessary to steer a boy away from
          dangerous pastimes is to provide a sane outlet for
          his excess energy.”

          The 500 members of the council, representing more
          than 1,000,000 workingmen throughout the United
          States and covering almost every line of industrial
          endeavor, unanimously adopted resolutions against
          the use of alcohol, in part as follows:

          “It is recognized that the use of alcoholic
          stimulants is productive of most industrial
          accidents and works against the safety and
          efficiency of workmen.

          “Therefore, be it resolved, That it is the sense of
          this congress that the members pledge themselves to
          the elimination of the use of alcoholic stimulants
          among the employes of their plants and factories.”

          M. A. Dow, general safety agent of the New York
          Central lines, thought “the public must be educated
          to believe that a railroad’s safety rules are for
          their benefit, rather than to save the company
          damage suits.” As evidence of the progress of the
          “safety first” propaganda, he cited figures of
          his company showing that for the year ending June
          30, 1914, there had been 109 fewer deaths from
          accidents and 132 fewer injuries.

          The inculcation of accident prevention should
          start in the kindergarten and continue through
          high school and college, in the opinion of Martin
          J. Insull, vice president of the Middle West
          Utilities Company, Chicago.

          “The public’s extravagant disregard for the value
          of its safety is shown during the automobile
          season, when our papers constantly report
          terrible accidents invariably caused by suicidal
          carelessness,” said he.

          Melville W. Mix, president of the Dodge
          Manufacturing Company, Mishawaka, Ind., and head
          of the manufacturers’ bureau of that state, placed
          the blame for 75 per cent of factory accidents on
          the disinterested and indifferent attitude of the
          employer toward his employe.

          “Safety first is not a philanthropic movement on
          the part of employer to employe,” said he. “Safety
          first is a hard practicality of business extension.
          That seems a hard statement, but it is not without
          its qualifications, as there is a blood-and-soul
          side of every phase of business life.

          “We see wealthy magnates lay fabulous sums at the
          disposal of a world peace tribunal, and we see in
          what short space of time the martial strength of a
          continent may apparently forget the life-conserving
          principles to which they have subscribed. Do we
          see any such enthusiasm in the cause of commercial
          or industrial safety? Is the blood spilled at
          the lathe, the forge, the throttle or the grade
          crossing less red, less valuable than that shed on
          fields of battle?”

          *       *       *       *       *

          RAILWAY COMMISSIONS’ CONVENTION

          _Madison_ [_Wis._] _Democrat_

          WASHINGTON, Nov. 17.--“More deaths are caused by
          improper ventilation of train coaches and waiting
          rooms than by train accidents.”

          The committee on railway service and railway
          accommodations so reported to the annual convention
          of the national association of railway commissions
          today.

          “The noxious gases that fill coaches, especially
          sleeping cars, in connection with the peculiar
          character of dust therein, are most conducive
          to germ breeding where proper ventilation is
          lacking,” the committee added.

          In regard to the lighting of railway coaches, the
          committee said that this problem has been fairly
          satisfactorily solved on the trunk lines, but that
          on many branch lines the dingy, dirty oil lamp is
          still in evidence. A vigorous campaign against this
          condition is recommended.

          Carelessness in providing drinking water at
          stations and on trains is noted, and it is
          recommended that railroad commissions abolish the
          stationary water cooler and prescribe a cooler with
          a portable container. Uniform methods of cleansing
          such containers, sanitary methods of handling ice,
          and sanitary drinking cups, to be provided free of
          charge for the public are also recommended and the
          placing of ice in the receptacle is deprecated.

          The failure of suburban trains to arrive and depart
          on time is the cause of wide complaint, says the
          committee. Another source of complaint is the lack
          of adequate service on Sundays. The committee
          believes that at least one train should operate in
          each direction as a minimum Sunday service.

          The committee recommends the elimination of the
          practice of paying freight bills carrying manifest
          over charges. Delays in handling and settling
          claims are also complained of, and the committee
          concludes that the best means of minimizing such
          delays is to require the railroads to pay interest
          on the true claim amount from the date the amount
          of the claim went into their hands.

          On the question of substitution of steel for
          wooden cars, the committee recommends that the
          interstate commerce commission be given full power
          to prescribe the character of equipment to be used
          in interstate commerce.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CLUB VOTES TO DISBAND

          _Ohio State Journal_

          The Social Workers’ Club is dead.

          The end came peacefully at 10:10 last evening,
          after a protracted period of wasting away. The
          immediate friends of the deceased were present at
          the last.

          While a divergency of opinion existed among those
          called in to treat the patient, a majority seemed
          to feel that the demise was due to malnutrition
          and faulty assimilation. It was felt that the
          Social Workers’ Club had failed to take its own
          medicine--it was not social.

          At a consultation held last evening at the Y. M. C.
          A. 30 persons were present. They had appeared out
          of a list of 78 who had been advised that the end
          was near. The main question was whether digitalis
          and oxygen should be administered, or whether
          nature should be allowed to take its apparent
          course, unhindered. On a roll call six voted to let
          it die. Four voted for resuscitation. The remaining
          20 did not care enough to vote, or were animated by
          high humanitarian motives which forbade holding out
          hope to a doomed patient.

          The Social Workers’ Club was born about five years
          ago. It was a healthy infant at first, with strong
          pulse and regular respiration, and took nourishment
          regularly once a month. Social experts from all
          over the country came and told it how to get along.
          It passed through its second summer and teething
          period without serious disorder. The third year it
          showed a difficulty in digesting all that it heard.
          Under treatment this disorder did not disappear,
          but seemed rather to augment. A series of special
          dinners drained its vitality to the lowest ebb.

          One of the reasons advanced for this condition
          last night was that the family income was not
          sufficient to support the child as it required, two
          other children, the Council of Churches and the
          Philanthropic Council, having divided the natural
          resources.

          Miss Blanche Green prescribed a treatment of play,
          but it did not meet with general approval. She said
          it wasn’t Gowdy that brought people down town last
          night, but just a desire to play. She confessed
          to an occasional desire for a game of mumbly-peg.
          “Social workers, who are trying to reform the
          world, have forgotten how to be social,” she said.

          Rev. H. W. March was inclined to the belief that
          the treatment had been regular and academic
          throughout. He thought that if the patient had
          to die, no criticism could lie against those who
          attended in its last hours. Prof. H. R. Horton was
          inclined to adopt the Green diagnosis, but thought
          a return to the treatment administered during the
          first two years might prolong life.

          The other children, the Council of Churches and the
          Philanthropic Council, survive, and kind-hearted
          neighbors will look after them until they adjust
          themselves to the new condition of things.

          *       *       *       *       *

          OLD CLOTHES MEN’S MEETING

          _New York Sun_

          Around the corner from the weather-beaten Church
          of the Sea and Land in Henry street yesterday
          afternoon there was a buzzing of voices which grew
          in time to a loud and angry chorus and drew all the
          children of the quarter. The children thought there
          was a fight, but the policeman who was passing the
          time of day with a café keeper whose name ended in
          “opoulos,” knew better, grinned and went on about
          his business.

          The old clothes dealers, whose profit lies in
          shambling through the better residence streets in
          the early morning and shattering the quiet with
          their singsong appeals for trade, were meeting to
          denounce Gen. Bingham, Commissioner of Police.
          Since last Monday, when the police muffled the
          strident voices of the “cash-for-clo’” men as a
          consequence of his belief that there was entirely
          too much unnecessary noise in this town, the
          dealers have accumulated bitterness in their
          insides.

          Therefore yesterday afternoon in the hall at 49
          Henry street they howled their woes against the
          walls and let out pent up sounds. Principally, it
          appeared, their wrath was directed against the
          Police Commissioner. He was a tyrant. He was a
          czar. He was several distinct and wholly different
          kinds of things which could only be expressed
          in Yiddish. English was quite unequal to their
          necessities. But the aristocrats of their trade
          who gabble at the corner of Bayard and Elizabeth
          streets came in for full scorn. Why were these
          allowed to buy and sell with appropriate outcries
          and calls when the itinerant pedlers were muzzled
          by the law?

          At Bayard and Elizabeth streets is the great old
          clothes exchange of New York city--of the whole
          country, for that matter--where any day in the week
          you will find in the open street several hundred
          old and bearded men, with green frock coats that
          sweep to their knees, dealing in cast off garments
          and shoes. The Jewish women of the East Side,
          thrifty souls, go there to trade cloth, ironware,
          dishes, ribbons, anything they can spare, for hats
          or coats or trousers or shoes that their men might
          wear. Old clothes brokers from the South--as far
          south as Atlanta--haggle with the dealers of the
          East Side, and take back to their homes great packs
          of clothes bought cheap in money, dear in words.

          It was the complaint of the Old Clothes Dealers’
          Protective Association, the itinerant pedlers,
          that the police mandate against noise has not been
          applied to the market place at Bayard and Elizabeth
          streets.

          The voice of Ikey Cohen, veteran hawker,
          rumbled toward old Jacob Jahr, president of the
          association, who sat high on the rostrum, high hat
          over his ears, pulling at his gray streaked beard,
          and lost itself in the recesses behind a great
          seven branched candlestick.

          “No more I must gif my calls,” he complained with
          outspread hands. “If so much as I gry, ‘Gaaaa-ssh!
          Ol’ Clo’s. Gaaaa-ssh!’ a bolisman he koms from
          Bingham and grabs my arm by him and he says, ‘Gut
          id owid! If you make a holler you’ll be peenched!’”
          [Applause.]

          And all around the long room, a place of prayer and
          meditation on the Jewish Sabbath, the men nodded
          their heads solemnly grunting in their beards,
          saying in Yiddish:

          “Truly, that is the way we have found it. How is
          a citizen to prosper in these days, I ask you, my
          friend?”

          Old Louis Stein, pedler for twenty-five years, and
          reputed to be rich, orated in English after his own
          fashion.

          “Der city it owes us a liffing? Say you so? Vell,
          then. How vill beoples know vat we vant unless ve
          make cries? Uddervise, ve might as well chump in
          der river! Ledt us write to Bresident Roosevelt! He
          vill tell Mister Bingham [very scornfully was this
          said] where to make a gedt off!” [More applause and
          a great stamping on the floor.]

          Along toward evening, when the meeting of the
          400 old clothes pedlers had run for three hours,
          and nearly everybody had had a say, most of
          them comparing New York to St. Petersburg, the
          advantage lying entirely with the latter capital,
          they decided to send a delegation to Commissioner
          Bingham to-day to beg that they be permitted once
          more to seek trade with their tongues. They agreed
          among themselves to call very softly, only twice
          or three times in any street, if the General would
          permit them to open their mouths. Also, they intend
          to ask that the permanent exchange at Bayard and
          Elizabeth streets be muffled if they are to be kept
          quiet.

          The House and Wagon Pedlers’ Association, which
          takes in all the fruit and vegetable venders, met
          last night at 304 East 101st street and decided to
          send a committee of their own to the Commissioner.
          They, as well as the old clothes merchants, said
          that business has fallen off at least 50 per cent
          since the anti-noise order was put into effect.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FRIENDS’ ANNUAL MEETING

          _New York Evening Post_

          “If it does not seem like hurrying our business,”
          said the clerk of the meeting, “we will now hear
          read the letter from the Philadelphia Meeting.” And
          the soft stillness of the Yearly Meeting in the
          old Friends’ Meeting House on Fifteenth Street,
          softened into even greater stillness and quiet, to
          listen. The voice of the clerk, his grave, slow
          courtesy, and his wish for no unseemly haste, were
          in perfect blending with the old, buff room lighted
          only through the great, square-paned windows below
          and above the gallery, through which the green of
          the old trees in the yard could be seen, in perfect
          harmony with the gentle, kindly, gracious spirit of
          the people gathered there, for communion with one
          another.

          “Let us miss no opportunity of expressing the love
          we feel one for another, one for another,” said one
          of the eight women who sat on the facing seats, an
          old lady with silvery hair under her black bonnet.
          The words, “one for another” might have been the
          text of the morning, not alone of the woman who
          first spoke them, but of all the words which were
          said.

          Another woman spoke. She was an English woman
          who, with her husband, represented the London
          Meeting. “Why do we not have a crusade for love?”
          she asked. “War goes on, and we do nothing about
          it. If this love which we have in our hearts could
          be irradiated about the world, war could not be
          possible. Thoughts of love, if sent out by us
          steadily and consistently, must reach to the ends
          of the earth, as the ripples which a stone makes in
          a pool.”

          But the war was little touched upon. That, with
          almost all of the more important business of the
          meeting, will be taken up in the later meetings
          this afternoon, tonight, Wednesday afternoon, and
          Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday evenings. This
          morning was held apart almost entirely for the text
          “One for another.”

          It could almost have been a country meeting. The
          old, square, red-brick building on 15th Street
          hears little of the noise of the city. This
          morning there was little sound but the stirring
          of raindrops on the panes. And the unhurried,
          quiet time was given up to greetings and welcomes,
          messages to those who could not come, the reading
          of messages from Friends in other places, and slow
          emphasis on the kindly details of their fellowship
          one for another.

          The meeting was opened when the eight women and
          the five men had taken their places on the facing
          seats and exchanged their silent handclasps, with
          which also the meeting closes. They were, truly,
          the elders of this house, the ones who can remember
          farthest back into the times when all the women,
          and not just three or four, wore close Quaker
          bonnets. A tiny woman in gray rose twice from her
          facing place to confirm what had been said. Some
          one had greeted the members of the London Meeting
          and recalled her own warm welcome at that meeting
          many years ago. The little old woman rose swiftly,
          and, looking down at the English people, said, with
          infinite dignity and sweetness in her voice, “We
          are very glad to have these Friends with us. I also
          remember the very cordial welcome I received from
          the London Meeting.” The very slow, quiet words had
          the sound of deep ceremony, of the conferring of
          great and unforgettable honor upon these visitors
          from another country.

          There was a prayer for strength “to partake of Thy
          Spirit,” a poem read which said, “Has the Gospel of
          Peace then failed us, That such a thing can be?”
          and many suggestions concerning appreciations,
          sympathies, letters, to be sent. Resolutions,
          called minutes, were gently put, and a soft voice
          would come from somewhere, saying, “I should
          approve that,” followed by a chorus of “So should
          I.”

          In the Gymnasium are the old books, the record of
          the things which the oldest Friends remember, and
          of things which happened so far back in the years
          that May was spoken of as Third Month instead of
          Fifth. This was in the oldest book of them all,
          unbound until recently, with yellowed, stained,
          finely written pages, the “Paper of Advice” sent by
          George Fox to the Quakers of Long Island. It was
          brought there by John Burnyeat on the twenty-ninth
          day of the then third month, 1671. Records of all
          births, deaths, marriages, removals, are here
          since 1672, long before other denominations or
          governments began to keep such close watch of
          statistics. For birthright membership is the very
          basis of the old faith, the heritage which comes
          down from father to son through the centuries
          and which keeps the bonds so close that bind the
          families and the friends of Friends, one to another.

          Out in the meeting-room, with the sight of the
          leaves and a red brick wall outside the high
          windows, there is little to make one know that the
          old yellow leaves were written so very long ago,
          after all. Perhaps in those old days there were no
          white and purple lilacs in the front of the room to
          nod and drowse and sweeten through the long hours.
          Perhaps then there was not so much true kindliness
          as has come with the years of Friendliness. To-day,
          when one of the oldest women rises from her place
          to speak, an old man says gently, “Elizabeth,
          thee need not rise to speak unless thee prefer.”
          He might not have done that in the old days, but
          surely her answer would have been the same, “Thank
          thee, Charles, but I prefer to stand when I speak,”
          with just a hint of reproof in her tone.




CHAPTER VII

SPEECHES, INTERVIEWS, AND REPORTS


=Type of story.= Speeches, lectures, addresses, and sermons may be
considered in the same class with interviews and reports, because all
are alike in being some form of utterance. Hence news stories of them
consist largely of reproductions of the words and ideas of some person.
A speech and a report differ only in the fact that one is spoken and
the other is written. An interview, likewise, may be regarded as an
informal address delivered to an audience of one. When an interview is
given in question and answer form, it resembles cross-examination in a
court story more than it does a speech.

As reproductions of utterances, news stories of speeches and reports
must be largely informative. Except for an occasional opportunity to
describe the speaker or the audience, they offer practically no field
for human interest development. In interviews, on the other hand, it
is possible to bring out the human interest element in portraying the
character and personality of the person interviewed (cf. “Interview,”
p. 135). Otherwise interviews, like speeches and reports, are largely
informative (cf. “Interview with Official,” p. 133).

=Purpose.= To reproduce as accurately as possible the ideas
expressed by a speaker, by a person interviewed, or by the author of
a report is obviously the only object in writing a news story dealing
with such material. Four common faults that endanger the accuracy of
news stories of this type are carelessness in taking down what is
said, the playing up of statements that taken from their context are
misleading, unintentional distortion due to giving disproportionate
space or emphasis to some points, and misrepresentation because
of political partisanship or other bias. All quotation, direct or
indirect, should be accurate not only in substance and form but also
in spirit. A statement taken verbatim from a speech, interview, or
report, may be played up in the lead in such a way that it does not
give the actual thought or purpose of the original. By confining his
news story to only one or two phases of the subject discussed, a writer
often gives an erroneous impression of the whole speech. Distortion and
suppression of speeches, interviews, or reports because of political or
other bias is indefensible.

=Treatment.= Since news stories of this class must consist
largely of direct and indirect quotation from an utterance, the
problem of presenting news of this kind is usually that of condensing,
summarizing, and combining different parts of the available material
into a unified, coherent whole. This requires effort and skill.

In writing up interviews and speeches the reporter has a chance to
portray clearly and attractively the speaker and the circumstances,
thus stimulating the reader’s interest in the utterance (cf.
“Interview,” p. 136). As the purpose of an interview is to present
the ideas of the person interviewed, the reporter’s questions, which
are a necessary means of obtaining an expression of these ideas,
are suppressed in many stories. In other stories, the questions are
embodied in the answers or are repeated by the person interviewed.
There is a growing tendency, particularly in signed stories of
interviews, to give the reporter’s questions.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SPEECH

          _Kansas City Star_

          Switzerland is a haven of peace in a weary waste of
          war. Why? Charles H. Grasty answered that question
          Wednesday in his address before the City Club. It
          is because Switzerland, a valorous David, inspires
          respect from the Goliaths that surround the little
          republic. And Switzerland has said that it would
          defend its neutrality with all its strength.

          Switzerland is the best equipped for fighting--size
          considered--of all the nations. Every man from
          20 to 48 is a trained soldier. Those who are
          unable physically to qualify are formed into trade
          and professional groups and are available for
          supplementing the work of the army.

          The system is compulsory, but it is also a
          voluntary system, since it was installed by the
          direct vote. The people of Switzerland decided that
          they were free citizens of a free republic, and
          that it was their duty to keep it a free country.
          Every man is more than willing to do his bit, and
          the service is held in such high respect that
          bankrupts and criminals are denied the privilege
          of taking part in the national defense. Instead,
          they are required to pay a special tax in lieu of
          service.

          It is surprising how little time each man is
          required to contribute to the army. He enlists at
          20, and that year he spends from sixty to ninety
          days in training, according to the branch of the
          service to which he is attached.

          From then on he spends two weeks a year, for a
          period of years, in brushing up the military
          knowledge he gained and in acquiring new training.
          That is all. There is no rigid system that compels
          him to give up from two to five of his most
          fruitful years to service with the colors. It’s a
          free man’s system, conducted by free men.

          The system begins in the public schools, where
          every boy is compelled to take athletic training.
          Several hours a week are spent teaching the
          youngsters military subjects, so that when the
          boy reaches his twentieth year he is a piece of
          fine timber. His body is strong, and he has some
          knowledge of what discipline means. Every boy gets
          the preliminary training, even in the private
          schools.

          At 20 he enlists in the “elite” or first line. For
          two or three months he receives intensive training.
          They make real work of it while it lasts, but they
          are over with it quickly.

          The rudiments of military life are drilled into
          the new recruits without any waste of time or money.

          Soldiers and corporals, after the first year, go
          back every year for two weeks’ training until they
          are 27 years old, and then they are through, except
          for a final training trip when they enter the
          second line division, which begins at the age of
          33. Noncommissioned officers and subalterns go back
          every year during their first line service, and
          once every four years in the second line service,
          which lasts until the age of 41. From 41 to 48
          years is the age division for the third line.

          Officers are not appointed through civil
          authorities but are selected for merit and by
          examination after they have completed the special
          courses offered by the government for those who
          desire commissions. The officers give more time to
          their studies than the privates, and they assemble
          quite often for war games and tactical discussions.

          That is all there is to the system. There is no
          standing army, no military class, no terrible
          burdens of taxation. There is a general staff,
          a few officers to look after the details of
          recruiting and a number of instructors--less
          than two thousand men in all who are connected
          permanently with the army.

          Yet in 1912 a fighting force of 490,430 men was
          available out of a total population of 4 million.
          The expense of the whole system that year was
          $8,229,941, or $16.77 a man.

          In the United States in 1913 94 million dollars was
          spent on the army--ten times and more above what
          Switzerland spent--and all it paid for was a scant
          ninety thousand fighting men. An army less than
          one-fifth as large as Switzerland’s cost more than
          ten times as much.

          As an economic proposition it would appear that
          compulsory service was a better bargain in defense
          than the American system as it exists today.

          The strong point of the Swiss system is that it
          renders every man available for defense without
          imposing a burdensome tax on the country. The Swiss
          citizen becomes an actual, tangible part of his
          country. He takes pride in the citizen army, and
          in many cases the government fosters semi-official
          societies that aim to give additional training to
          those who care for it.

          The beautiful thing about the Swiss plan is that it
          works. Surrounded by thundering cannon, Switzerland
          is at peace.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_Following the lead given below was
          a verbatim report of the speech._

          SPEECH

          _New York Times_

          Strict neutrality, extreme caution in the
          publication of unconfirmed news, and “America
          first” were the keynotes of a speech by President
          Wilson that aroused great enthusiasm among
          newspaper editors and publishers from all parts of
          the country at the luncheon of The Associated Press
          at the Waldorf-Astoria yesterday.

          Each telling point the President made in his
          speech, every word of which he seemed to weigh
          before uttering, was applauded by the audience of
          more than 300 at the tables and by a gallery of
          about 100 men and women.

          The importance attached to his clear statement of
          the neutrality policy of his Administration was
          reflected in a request made by Melville E. Stone,
          Secretary and General Manager of The Associated
          Press, just before the Chief Magistrate was
          introduced, that all newspaper reports of the
          President’s speech be based on the verbatim copy
          to be taken by a stenographer and supplied to all
          of the newspapers and news-gathering associations
          represented.

          Frank B. Noyes of The Washington Star, President
          of The Associated Press, praised President
          Wilson’s masterful maintaining of true neutrality,
          and said that the President had borne his great
          responsibility nobly. The applause that the
          laudatory remarks received would have done justice
          to a Democratic Nominating Convention. All arose
          and drank a toast to the President, and arose again
          when the orchestra struck up “The Star-Spangled
          Banner,” and again when the President stood up to
          speak.

          In introducing President Wilson, the guest of
          honor, Mr. Noyes made brief reference to the scope
          of The Associated Press, saying he believed that,
          in scope and importance, it was “the greatest
          co-operative non-profit making organization in
          the world.” Its function, he said, was to furnish
          its members a service of world news untainted and
          without bias of any sort.

          “To insure this,” he said, “we have formed an
          organization that is owned and controlled by its
          members, and by them alone; one that is our servant
          and not our master. So we are here today, Democrats
          and Republicans; Protestants, Catholics, and
          Jews; Conservatives and Radicals, Wets and Drys;
          differing on every subject on which men differ, but
          all at one in demanding that, so far as is humanly
          possible, no trace of partisanship and no hint of
          propaganda shall be found in our news reports.

          “Because of its traditions and its code, and
          perhaps also because of the never ceasing
          watchfulness of 900 members, it has come to pass
          that few people on earth are capable of giving the
          management of The Associated Press any points on
          maintaining a strict, though benevolent, neutrality
          on all questions on which we can be neutral and
          still be what we are--loyal Americans. We know,
          too--none better--that the genuine neutral, the
          honest neutral, is always the target of every
          partisan, and we find some solace in the fact that
          this is now being demonstrated to the world at
          large.

          “Today, however, we willingly lower our crest
          to one who has demonstrated in these agonizing
          times his mastership of the principles of
          true neutrality, and who, fully realizing the
          dreadful consequences of any departure from these
          principles, has nobly borne his terrible burden of
          responsibility in guarding the peace, the welfare,
          and the dignity of our common country.

          “Our distinguished guest, who so honors us today,
          may surely know that in the perplexities and trials
          of these days, so black for humanity, he has our
          thorough, loyal, and affectionate support.

          “God grant him success in his high aims for the
          peaceful progress of the people of the United
          States.”

          After the toast and cheers and hand-clapping, the
          Grand Ballroom became silent as the President began
          speaking.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SPEECH

          _Madison [Wis.] Democrat_

          WASHINGTON, Dec. 31.--The place of united
          pan-America in the situation which will confront
          the world at the end of the European war was
          pictured to the Pan-American Scientific Congress
          today by Director General John Barrett of the
          Pan-American union.

          The delegates were electrified by his prediction
          of an evolution of the Monroe doctrine into a
          pan-American doctrine for a mutual defense against
          aggression from overseas.

          He defined such a doctrine as meaning “that the
          Latin-American republics, in the event that the
          United States were attacked by a foreign foe,
          would, with all their physical and moral force,
          stand for the protection and sovereignty of the
          United States just as quickly as the United States
          under corresponding circumstances would stand for
          their integrity and sovereignty.”

          Wherever the pan-American delegates gathered the
          director general’s declaration was discussed with
          the greatest interest and it was regarded generally
          as one of the outstanding events of the congress,
          pointing the way to a new pan-American unity.

          “Both victor and vanquished in the European
          war will be hostile to America at the close of
          hostilities,” said he. “The former will say it won
          in spite of the attitude of the United States and
          the other American republics, and the latter will
          say it lost because of the attitude of the United
          States and its sister republics.

          “In the mind of everybody interested in
          pan-Americanism is the question, ‘What is going
          to happen to pan-America when this war is over?’
          Immediately there is the reply: ‘The American
          republics must stand together for the eventualities
          that may possibly develop.’

          “While everyone would deplore any agitation or
          suggestion that a European nation or a group of
          European nations following this struggle should
          undertake any territorial aggrandizement in the
          western hemisphere, or in any way take action
          that would contravene the Monroe doctrine, it
          must be borne in mind, and cannot be for a moment
          overlooked, that whatever way this war results
          there may be little or no love for the United
          States and the other nations which form pan-America.

          “No matter, therefore, how just and fair the
          nations of America have been in their efforts
          to preserve their neutrality and in no way
          interfere on either side of this conflict, the war
          passions and the war power of the peoples and the
          governments of the victorious group of nations may
          force a policy toward pan-Americanism, toward the
          Monroe doctrine, and toward their relationship with
          individual countries of the western hemisphere
          which will demand absolute solidarity of action
          on the part of the American republics to preserve
          their very integrity.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          SPEECH BY THE PRESIDENT

          _Kansas City Star_

          INDIANAPOLIS, Jan. 8.--Half playfully,
          half earnestly, President Wilson told three
          thousand people at Richmond, Ind., this afternoon
          that this nation is heeding what is “none of your
          business”--Europe’s affairs. In place of this,
          he counseled serious deliberation on America’s
          business, its future and its part in the betterment
          of mankind. The nation, he said, must maintain its
          equilibrium; it must face, too, the problem of the
          future now that the administration has endeavored
          to break the shackles on American business.

          The President said:--

          “You know I have been confined for a couple of
          years at hard labor and am out on parole for a day
          or two, but I want to say this, my fellow citizens,
          that it is very genuine pleasure to me to get
          abroad again and stir among the people I so dearly
          love.

          “Because the one thing we have to think about down
          in Washington is the best thing to do for you and
          the thing that you want us to do for you, and that
          is a mighty hard thing to find out, particularly
          when you are not thinking about your own affairs
          and are constantly thinking about what is none of
          your business, namely, what is going on on the
          other side of the water. I say that in playfulness,
          but I mean it half in earnest.

          “It does not do, my friends, to divert our
          attention from the affairs of this great country.

          “The duty which this country has to perform to the
          rest of the world largely depends upon the way in
          which it performs its duty to itself.

          “I have always thought with regard to individuals
          that if a man was true to himself, he would then
          be true to other persons; and I believe that that
          applies to a great country like ours, that a
          nation that is habitually true to its own exalted
          principles of action will know how to serve the
          rest of mankind when the opportunity offers. That
          is a very deep philosophy of life which it is very
          thoroughly worth while living up to.

          “We have been trying at Washington to remove some
          of the shackles that have been put upon American
          business; but after you have removed the shackles
          you must determine what you are going to do with
          your liberty. And there are many tasks to perform
          for mankind. There are many things to be bettered
          in this world which we must set ourselves to make
          better. So what I want to say to you now is merely
          this:

          “Let us seek sober, common counsel about our own
          affairs, and then when the time comes, when we can
          act upon a larger field, there will be no mistake
          as to what America will do for the peace of the
          world, having found her own peace and having
          established justice in her own mind.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          ADDRESS

          _Chicago Tribune_

          For many years Glencoe boasted a wonderful spring
          of pure water gushing from a bluff and running in
          crystalline beauty down to the lake. The spring was
          constant even in the dryest seasons. It always ran
          a generous, spirited stream, clear and cold. Then
          along came the village manager, a new official in
          the new order of things--H. H. Sherer, appointed to
          put the affairs of the suburb on a business basis.

          In a curious moment Mr. Sherer shut off the water
          in the mains. Then he went back to the “spring” and
          awaited results. In forty minutes the perpetual
          spring ceased to flow.

          Glencoe had been paying 7 cents a thousand gallons
          to pump the water that ran off into the lake night
          and day the year around.

          The story of the spring was a part of Mr. Sherer’s
          address last night before the Wilmette Civic
          association. He explained the work of village
          management as a business enterprise and told of
          important savings gained.

          *       *       *       *       *

          LECTURE

          _New York Herald_

          “I don’t believe in the public cooking of milk, or
          in the public cooking of anything else to be used
          in the home,” said Dr. Thomas Darlington, formerly
          Commissioner of Health in this city, during an
          illustrated lecture last night at the headquarters
          of the Agora, a civic association which is a branch
          of the John F. Curry Association, at No. 413 West
          Fifty-seventh street.

          Unsanitary conditions under which milk was
          detected being brought into this city during his
          administration of the Health Department were
          described and shown in detail by Dr. Darlington,
          as well as the conditions under which the milk is
          pasteurized in up-State and local dairies.

          “Pasteurization may be good, but personally I
          do not believe in it,” he said. “The object of
          pasteurization is the destruction of bacteria which
          it may contain by a process of heating the milk
          to from 140 to 160 degrees. It is not a process
          of boiling, but merely of bringing the milk to a
          percentage of heat at which the bacteria will be
          destroyed.

          “In my opinion the home and not a public place is
          for the cooking of food products which are to be
          used in the home. It can and should be done just as
          well there as in any other place.”

          An absolutely perfect milk supply is impossible in
          this city, according to Dr. Darlington, at a retail
          price of less than twenty cents a quart. To add to
          this the cost of pasteurization, he said, would
          raise the price still higher.

          He pointed out that the excessive cost of
          production under conditions that would result in
          absolutely pure milk would make the retail price
          almost prohibitive.

          *       *       *       *       *

          LECTURE

          _St. Louis Globe-Democrat_

          WASHINGTON, February 6.--Telling of times when
          dog meat--and the meat of starved-to-death dogs
          at that--tasted better than any porterhouse steak
          he had ever eaten; picturing a region where the
          average velocity of the wind is fifty miles, where
          a bunting flag goes to shreds in a few minutes,
          a flag of stoutest canvas is threshed to pieces
          in an hour, and a flag of tin is battered out of
          shape in the first gale, so that sheet iron is
          the material that must be used; describing sea
          elephants that weigh sometimes as much as four tons
          each and measure 25 feet in length, Sir Douglas
          Mawson has presented before the National Geographic
          Society one of the most remarkable stories of polar
          exploration that has ever come from those regions.

          In his account of his researches along the great
          Antarctic continent discovered by Rear Admiral
          Charles Wilkes--the same Admiral Wilkes who figured
          in the historic Trent affair, in which he, during
          the American civil war, held up the British packet
          Trent, and removed from her, Mason and Slidell--Sir
          Douglas paid tribute to the explorer and his work.

          Mawson and his party undertook the work under
          the patronage of the Australian Government. The
          steamer Aurora, formerly plying in American waters,
          was the ship that carried them away. A midway base
          with a wireless relay station through which the
          party could keep in touch with civilization, was
          established at Macquarie Island, which was on the
          old sailing ship route between Australia and Cape
          Horn and whose beaches are lined with the wrecks of
          many a ship. The main base was established at Cape
          Dennison, on the Antarctic continent, and a second
          base several hundred miles further east.

          Pictures were brought back by Sir Douglas showing
          the nesting places of a number of birds of passage
          who go to the Polar continent to nest and whose
          eggs have never been seen before. The birds and
          sea elephants were absolute strangers to fear, and
          would inspect the camera man with as much seeming
          interest as the camera man inspected them.

          The character of the winds that blow on the edge
          of the Antarctic Continent was graphically shown
          by the fact that the men had to lean out upon it,
          at an angle of perhaps forty-five degrees, to walk
          in the ordinary wind, while no camera could record
          anything but a blank when the blizzard was at its
          height.

          The hut which was the headquarters of the party
          had one window, which was in the roof. The breath
          of the men and the steam of the kitchen caused
          this to become frosted over to the thickness of 5
          inches. Men going out to take the records of the
          climatological instruments had to break the ice
          that froze before their faces, from one side of
          their hoods to the other, and pictures showing how
          their faces were covered with great patches of
          frost bite, told an eloquent story of suffering.

          But the scene was not all somber. The cellar was a
          natural refrigerator, and consisted simply of the
          space under the floor of the hut. When the cook
          wanted a piece of meat he would send a dog down to
          get a penguin or a leg of mutton, and would take
          it away from him as he came out. One day the dog
          got away with a leg of mutton, which was rescued
          only after a chase of two hours, and then it was
          so damaged that the party voted to give it to
          the dogs, after all. Reading matter was in great
          demand. One of the party read the Encyclopedia
          Britannica through to the O’s.

          Upon one occasion Sir Douglas set out with Mr.
          Mertz and Lieut. Ninnis on a coast charting
          expedition. After going about 200 miles Ninnis
          and his sledge were lost in a great crevasse.
          Hours of calling brought no response, and the
          smashed-to-pieces sledge at the bottom told a
          painful story of his fate. Thereafter Mawson and
          Mertz turned around and started back to camp. They
          ate all the dogs, one by one, as they died by
          starvation.

          Finally there was only one dog left--Old Ginger.
          “Old Ginger was a noble animal,” said Sir Douglas,
          “and he was game to the last. But when he died of
          that sheer hunger of the Antarctic wilderness of
          ice and snow, Mertz and I had to eat his carcass.
          We ate the bony parts first, breaking every bone
          so as to get out the marrow. Raw dog meat may not
          sound attractive at a distance, or when one is this
          far removed from the ultimate hunger in which the
          stomach seems to attack its very self, but there it
          tasted as good as anything you ever ate.

          “Finally Mertz began to sicken and to weaken,
          and in a few days,--January 17 it was,--he died.
          I almost turned cannibal, so starved out was my
          condition, but with it all I buried him, and then
          started back on the 100-mile journey that lay
          between me and safety. Sore of body and sick of
          mind, it was more by crawling than by walking
          that I was able to get back to camp only to see
          the Aurora disappearing over the horizon. It left
          provisions for me, however, and six men to search
          for me. Nothing but Providence saved me from the
          fate of Mertz and Ninnis.”

          Sir Douglas showed pictures of beds of coal that
          tell of a time when tropic summer once reigned
          in this great home of the blizzards, and others
          revealing great ice cliffs with the stratified
          snows of a hundred winters upon them, each stratum
          standing out as clearly as though it were of
          sedimentary rock.

          *       *       *       *       *

          INTERVIEW WITH OFFICIAL

          _Indianapolis News_

          WASHINGTON, October 28.--That the United States,
          in a business and financial sense, can now view
          the war in Europe without serious apprehensions
          is the opinion of George E. Roberts, director of
          the mint, one of the keenest economists in the
          government service. Mr. Roberts talked about the
          situation today and made it plain that despite many
          disadvantages he sees no danger to this country.

          “The situation with respect to cotton,” said
          Mr. Roberts, “is the chief drawback. With the
          market for cotton limited and prices low, the
          south suffers seriously and the effect is felt
          on the entire country. The effects of the cotton
          situation, on the other hand, are to a considerable
          extent counteracted by the fact that in the north
          good prices are commanded by wheat, corn, live
          stock and other products of the northern farms.

          “This country may expect to be fairly prosperous
          during the period of the war in Europe. Capital
          will be dear and this will tend to prevent the
          starting of new enterprises. We can not have really
          good times unless money can readily be obtained for
          new enterprises.

          “I do not expect to see money available for the
          building of railroad improvements and extension
          and new lines. I do not expect to see new business
          enterprises to any considerable extent started
          while the war lasts. I expect to see business in
          many lines already established run along about as
          usual. In certain directions it will be improved.

          “The European countries, which are now at war,
          will go on putting out one issue of securities
          after another. It is a question how much of
          that they can float without compelling holders
          of American securities abroad to dispose of our
          securities. On the whole, I should expect most of
          the ready capital in this country, which under the
          conditions would be hunting for investments in new
          enterprises, to be absorbed for some time to come
          in taking up American securities parted with by
          foreign holders.”

          Mr. Roberts doubts whether the stock exchanges
          will soon reopen. He says one strong influence
          against it is the banks which have made loans on
          the basis of securities. They do not want, on
          the one hand, to call in their loans, and, on
          the other hand, they do not want to incur any
          danger of seeing stocks and securities they hold
          as collateral quoted at low figures. He thinks it
          will be a considerable time before the exchanges
          are reopened. He pointed out that it would be
          impossible long to dam up traffic in securities.

          “Already they have in New York the ‘gutter
          market,’” said Mr. Roberts. “I am informed that
          the volume of business done in this way is
          considerable, and it will grow. You can not stop
          for any length of time the business of exchange. If
          the exchanges are closed the buyer and seller will
          find some other method of coming together.”

          Due in part to the fact that the new federal
          reserve system will release a large volume of
          reserve money, and in part to the fact that the
          bankers and the country generally have recovered
          from the first shock of the war and now confront
          it without fear, Mr. Roberts thinks the banks will
          have plenty of money to lend. He looks for little
          disposition to lend money on new enterprises; but,
          on the other hand, he believes there will be plenty
          of money to advance to meet the needs of ordinary
          business and to extend the loans of the average
          borrower.

          As for the settlement of American indebtedness
          to Europe, concerning which there has been much
          discussion of the shipment of American gold abroad,
          Mr. Roberts thinks this problem will be adjusted.
          He pointed out that it would be partly adjusted
          by the growing volume of sales to Europe. It will
          be partly adjusted by the individuals who owe the
          debt, and who obtain extension. In one way and
          another the volume of the debt will be whittled
          down so that, according to Mr. Roberts, this
          problem is not at all insurmountable. As for the
          cotton situation, he hopes to see this worked out
          by the pool.

          *       *       *       *       *

          INTERVIEW WITH EDUCATOR

          _Indianapolis News_

          Exemplification. Two short breaths and a stutter
          and then as follows: e-x, ex; e-m, em, exem;
          p-l-i, pli, exempli; f-i, fi, exemplifi; c-a,
          ca, exemplifica; t-i-o-n, shun, exemplification;
          there’s your exemplification.

          “Correct, Johnnie,” and the schoolmaster, with a
          spelling-book in one hand and a lamp in the other,
          sends Johnnie to the head of the line and walks on
          through the dimly lighted country school building,
          pronouncing “jaw breakers,” teaching the youth to
          tread the flowery paths of knowledge, and in all
          ways carrying out the plans of a good old-fashioned
          country spelling match.

          Many men and women now well advanced in years
          learned to be good spellers largely by means of
          spelling matches supplemented by special spelling
          exercises on Friday afternoons. But Fassett A.
          Cotton, State Superintendent of Public Instruction,
          has some new ideas in regard to the best methods
          of teaching spelling, and this subject received
          considerable attention in the course of study which
          Mr. Cotton is now preparing, and which is to be
          used in the schools of the State during the coming
          year.

          “Spelling,” says Mr. Cotton, “can not be taught
          incidentally. It must have the systematic attention
          of the teacher as a separate subject and his
          constant care in all written work. While oral
          spelling is a helpful aid in fixing forms, it is
          generally conceded that written spelling must
          receive the larger stress. The eye rather than the
          ear must be trained. Indeed, correct spelling must
          be made an eye and muscle habit. Constant drill in
          writing correct forms of a word serves to build it
          into one’s very physical make-up.

          “There are certain laws, a knowledge of which is
          valuable in teaching spelling. The work should
          be inductive; that is, words spelled according
          to these laws should be presented in groups and
          the children led to construct the laws. There is
          a certain economy in learning the laws, because
          through them a group of words may be learned as
          easily as a single word. The fact that there are
          exceptions to the laws by no means destroys the
          claim for economy. There are two sides, then,
          to the spelling process, the mechanical and the
          rational, and the teacher must keep them both in
          mind. They go together. Both are essential. The
          return to the use of a spelling book indicates a
          belief in the need of more systematic work in oral
          and written spelling.”

          In regard to the subject matter of spelling, Mr.
          Cotton believes that here, as in other subjects,
          the dominant community interest should be taken
          into consideration. Each community, Mr. Cotton
          points out, has its own vocabulary. The assignment
          in spelling, he says, should be worked out as
          carefully as the assignment in any other subject,
          and, as in every other subject, the home life
          should dictate the point of departure.

          The assignment may from day to day, Mr. Cotton
          suggests, consist of lists of ten or twenty words
          covering the entire range of life in the community.
          The teacher may ask the class to hand in a list
          of ten words that are names of kitchen utensils.
          If there are five or six in the class, it may be
          that twenty or more different words will be named.
          Such a device furnishes the fairest test of the
          child’s ability to spell these words, because
          he suggests them to himself and is not aided by
          having them pronounced. The teacher should correct
          the lists and hand them back, and then the twenty
          different words should be used as a spelling lesson
          and made the basis of a permanent list. Similar
          lists may cover other home departments, industrial
          departments, or farm life, and there may be lists
          covering the vocabulary of the social, the civil or
          governmental, the religious and the school life of
          the community.

          The assignment may take another form, Mr. Cotton
          suggests, and accomplish the same purpose. The
          teacher may have it in mind to teach inductively
          the meaning of the word synonym. He gives
          the following list of words: farmer, grower,
          cultivator, agriculturist and husbandman. He then
          has the pupils pronounce each word, tell the
          meaning, use one of the words in a sentence and
          substitute as many words as possible for it. Other
          groups of farm words may be used in the same way.

          While Mr. Cotton concedes that the teacher must
          select, in the main, his own devices for teaching
          any subject, he offers the following suggestions
          for teaching spelling:

          “The words to be taught should be the words needed
          in the school vocabulary and in life.

          “The work should be based as much as possible upon
          the laws governing spelling, and should be done
          inductively.

          “Constant drill is essential, and absolute accuracy
          in all written work must be insisted upon.

          “It is a good practice to keep a list of words most
          commonly misspelled and point out and emphasize in
          some attractive way the difficulties in spelling
          these words.

          “Word building and word analysis are excellent
          devices.

          “The use of words in sentences different from those
          in which they are found in the text-book is good
          practice for the vocabulary of the pupil.

          “It is especially important that pupils should
          learn to use in sentences of their own construction
          the many simple words which are alike in their
          pronunciation, but which differ both in their
          spelling and in their use. The teacher will find it
          advantageous to make the list of homonyms in the
          spelling book the basis for language exercises as
          well as for spelling lessons.

          “The new speller should be in the hands of each
          and every pupil. The work is outlined by grades in
          the book. No pupil should be promoted till he has
          mastered all the words in the grade in which he is
          working.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          INTERVIEW WITH WOMAN PHILANTHROPIST

          _Kansas City Star_

          A little woman, her shoulders laden with the burden
          of a great effort to rid the world of poverty, came
          to Kansas City this morning. She is Mrs. Joseph
          Fels, widow of the Philadelphia philanthropist
          and manufacturer. With Daniel Kiefer, chairman
          of the Fels fund, and Mrs. Kiefer, Mrs. Fels is
          touring the principal cities of the United States
          in the interests of the idea to which Joseph Fels
          devoted his life, the taxation of land values. The
          philanthropist died last February.

          Mrs. Fels’s eyes kindled when the war was mentioned
          to her at the Savoy Hotel this morning. She was
          dressed simply in black, but the soberness of
          her attire was eclipsed by the animation of her
          features when she was given the opportunity to
          plunge into the subject to which she is now giving
          her life.

          “The war,” she cried softly. “It wouldn’t have come
          about if Europe had been listening. ‘More land,’
          the nations say; ‘more land,’ with a wealth of it
          within their own borders owned by great landlords.
          Yet they must fight to extend their boundary lines.

          “Is it possible to think that the good Lord would
          make a world in which there were more people than
          could be provided for? It is that idea that keeps
          us fighting on to make people realize. Freedom
          for each individual to earn his own living; we
          ask only for that. Tax the land; take the taxes
          off produced necessities; force landlords to quit
          holding empty land for the profit that comes from
          other people coming to live around it. Do you know
          that Philadelphia has 40,000 empty lots--not on
          the outskirts but in the city? London has 50,000
          of them. ‘Congestion,’--we speak of that, but what
          congestion would there be if every man could till
          the soil, and if selfishness and greed were not
          allowed to appropriate the earnings of others?”

          The diminutive figure of Mrs. Fels seemed to grow
          as her voice let escape in its tones something of
          the passionate conviction which she feels in the
          rightfulness of the land value taxation propaganda.

          “The world has had enough of charity, a poor
          patchwork of a poor system of civilization. We
          are trying to prevent the need of charity, trying
          to spread justice and freedom, to free the worker
          from the landlord’s domination and give him
          opportunity. For us opportunity is freedom.”

          Before the death of Mr. Fels, the philanthropist
          spent a good deal of time in England. Mrs. Fels
          still resides there half of the year.

          “England has a king,” she said, “but fundamentally
          the English government is more democratic than
          the United States. We call ourselves a democracy,
          but in reality we are a plutocracy. The idea of
          a democracy is a fine thing to hold up before
          the eyes of the people, but in the present
          circumstances it is only to blind them to real
          conditions.”

          Mrs. Fels is of German descent, but her sympathies
          and her blame for the war are with all of the
          fighting nations.

          “I am sorry for all of them,” she said, “but I
          know that all are implicated. Perhaps some good
          will come out of it. If the people of the warring
          nations are made so poor that the nations will
          have to take extreme measures to exist, the great
          estates of Europe will be thrown open to intensive
          farming and to all the other methods of adding to
          productiveness.”

          Daniel Kiefer, chairman of the Fels Fund, told some
          facts that Mrs. Fels appeared too modest to relate.

          When Joseph Fels was living he proposed to match
          dollar for dollar any fund that was raised in the
          United States to forward the single tax propaganda.
          He did the same thing in fifteen other countries.
          In this country in the last five years the Fels
          Fund has given more than ¼ million to less than
          half that amount raised by others.

          Mr. Kiefer explained that Mrs. Fels was giving
          herself to carrying on the movement in which her
          husband had shown so great an interest.

          “Giving myself and all I have and am,” added Mrs.
          Fels. This afternoon Mrs. Fels spoke at Central
          High School and at Swope Center. She will speak at
          the City Club at 8 o’clock tonight. A reception for
          Mrs. Fels by the Council of Clubs will be held from
          3 to 5 o’clock tomorrow afternoon. Mrs. Fels will
          speak again at a public meeting at the City Club at
          8 o’clock tomorrow night.

          *       *       *       *       *

          INTERVIEW WITH OPERA SINGER

          _Chicago Daily News_

          Mme. Tamakai Miura hid behind a baggage truck and
          pressed her fingers into her miniature ears. It was
          her first visit to Chicago.

          “Ooo!” exclaimed Mme. Miura. “Ooo!”

          The Twentieth Century limited was backing out of
          the LaSalle Street Station.

          “She is the first Japanese grand opera singer in
          the world, the first to sing in America and one
          of the best sopranos in the company!” shouted the
          press agent above the roar. He led the way to
          Mme. Miura. She stood half frightened and half
          amused, seeming like a figure that had escaped
          from a Japanese print and got lost in a Meissonier
          landscape. For Mme. Miura was still dressed in her
          native costume. She might have just wandered off
          the stage from a scene in “Madame Butterfly” in
          which she is going to sing for the Boston Opera
          Company.

          She wore a purple robe, with a dull red and gold
          girdle. It enveloped her in folds and a dull pink
          scarf covered her patent leather colored hair.
          American shoes, an American handbag and American
          furs testified to her acquired cosmopolitanism.

          “I like come here and sing,” said Mme. Miura,
          removing her fingers from her ears. “I been in
          London and all over the world. I am only singer
          in Japan. In Japan women don’ sing so much or do
          anything. They have no suffrage an’ only listen
          to the nightingale and the wind blow through the
          cherry tree. But art will liberate the ladies of
          Japan.”

          Mme. Miura glanced coquettishly at a Japanese man
          who stood near her.

          “What you think?” she inquired of him.

          “He is my husband,” she explained.

          Becoming more accustomed to the baggage truck and
          the Twentieth Century, Madame Miura continued:

          “When I come to America I all the time ’fraid
          people don’t like me because I hear about Japanese
          not being much liked, but when I come to New York
          everybody like me and is most nice to me. And I am
          sure everybody in Chicago like me. It is so full
          of noise, is it not? All America is full of noise.

          “I like most American scenery which the railroad
          show me. It is better than English or German
          scenery, because in English scenery all the trees
          look like doll trees and in Germany all the trees
          look like they have been straightened with mower of
          the lawn. In American scenery everything is big and
          wild and maybe full of animals, is it not?

          “And there is so much. I pass miles and miles in my
          ride, more than whole Japan.”

          Madame Miura’s English required the greatest
          concentration on her part. She paused and thought
          and then resumed.

          “Opera is new art in Japan. We have only very few
          singers. Because women have no great chance, but
          now maybe they have. I study in London and Berlin.
          I have sing before king and queen in Albert Hall.
          I sing Irish song, Scotch song, Italian and French
          song and English song. Isn’t that nice?”

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The following three telegraph
          stories show three different forms for a group
          of several interviews on the same subject, which
          in this case was a decision of the Interstate
          Commerce Commission granting the railroads the
          right to charge higher freight rates. As originally
          published, these stories followed stories from
          Washington, D.C. giving the details of the
          decision._

          GROUP OF INTERVIEWS

          (1)

          _Milwaukee Free Press_

          CHICAGO, Dec. 18.--Wholesale merchants and shippers
          of Chicago were elated today at the decision of the
          interstate commerce commission. Here is what some
          of them say:

          JOHN G. SHEDD, president Marshall Field & Co.:
          “Everyone should rejoice over the action of the
          interstate commerce commission. I regard this
          decision as marking the turning point in the
          business situation, and expect to see hereafter a
          marked advance on the road of prosperity by all
          lines of American industry.”

          JULIUS ROSENWALD, president of Sears-Roebuck &
          Co.: “Representing one of the largest shippers, I
          am glad to say that we rejoice in the decision. I
          believe it will have a far-reaching effect. It will
          help the whole United States and stimulate business
          all over the land.”

          JOHN V. FARWELL, president of the John V. Farwell
          Co.: “I am glad the application of the railroads
          for an increase in freight rates has been granted,
          as I believe the decision will be an essential
          factor in stimulating and encouraging all branches
          of business in all parts of the United States.”

          (2)

          _Chicago Tribune_

          New York, Dec. 18.--Howard Elliott, president of
          the New York, New Haven, and Hartford Railroad
          company, and chairman of the board of directors,
          commenting on the decision of the interstate
          commerce commission, said:

          “Careful calculations indicate that the increase in
          the gross freight earnings of the New Haven road,
          because of the decision of the commerce commission,
          will be less than $250,000 per year, and probably
          not much in excess of $200,000 a year on the
          present volume of business. So far this fiscal
          year, the freight earnings of the company have
          decreased $1,399,000.

          “We are gratified to have the commission recognize
          the necessity of increasing freight rates and we
          are glad to have even this modest increase.”

          A. H. Smith, president of the New York Central
          lines, made the following statement:

          “As nearly as I can learn from preliminary reports,
          the commerce commission has granted an increase on
          perhaps a little more than one-half of the tonnage,
          but to the extent that the increase has been
          granted it will help the railroad situation. It
          should also promote general public confidence for
          the future.

          “The commission has recognized not only the needs
          of the railroads but the effect upon the railroads
          of the present peculiar conditions. The increase
          granted will not solve the transportation problems
          of the day, but we are thankful for the help given
          and will endeavor to make the best possible use of
          it.”

          (3)

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Philadelphia, Pa., Dec. 18.--“The granting of the
          5 per cent freight increase will have absolutely
          no effect upon the passenger increases,” declared
          George W. Boyd, general passenger traffic manager
          of the Pennsylvania Railroad company. “We want
          to establish the two departments of our road on
          an independent basis, and to do this we need the
          passenger increase as much as the freight increase.”

          “I am glad for any decision that would bring
          prosperity to the people of Pennsylvania,” was the
          only comment of Gov.-elect Martin G. Brumbaugh.

          The commission will aid in smoothing the way
          to prosperity, in the opinion of Alba Johnson,
          president of the Baldwin Locomotive works.

          *       *       *       *       *

          OFFICIAL REPORT

          _Boston Transcript_

          Twenty-five States are represented in a crusade
          which the lawmakers and school authorities of
          the country are waging against the high school
          fraternity, according to a report which has
          just been issued by the United States Bureau of
          Education. Of these, thirteen States have passed
          legislative enactments hostile to the secret
          orders, while the school boards of important cities
          in the other twelve States have adopted like
          measures within their own jurisdiction.

          All States having laws on the subject provide a
          penalty of suspension or expulsion from school for
          all those who join these orders. The most drastic
          laws were passed by Iowa, Minnesota, and Nebraska,
          whose legislatures made it a misdemeanor for anyone
          even to solicit members to these organizations.
          Michigan and Ohio made it a misdemeanor for a
          school officer to fail or refuse to carry out the
          anti-high school fraternity law. Other States
          which prohibit these orders are California,
          Indiana, Kansas, Mississippi, Oregon, and Vermont.
          Massachusetts empowers the Boston School Committee
          to deal with the secret-society problem in its own
          way, while Washington gives the same latitude to
          the school boards of its larger cities.

          The more important cities whose school boards have
          passed regulations restricting or forbidding high
          school fraternities, are Denver, Meriden, Chicago,
          Covington, New Orleans, Lowell, Waltham, Worcester,
          Kansas City, Mo., St. Joseph, Butte, Oklahoma
          City, Reading, Salt Lake City, Madison, Milwaukee,
          Racine and Superior. The commonest penalties are
          suspension, expulsion, or debarment from athletic
          or other teams of the school.

          The United States Bureau of Education’s report
          also cites some of the more important court
          decisions, every one of which upholds the school
          authorities in dealing rigorously with the high
          school fraternity, on the ground that the measures
          so taken are authorized as a part of the school
          board’s discretionary powers. Most courts cited,
          however, will not allow the offending pupils to be
          barred from classroom exercises, although they can
          be barred from participating in all athletic or
          other contests.

          *       *       *       *       *

          REPORT OF SCIENTIST

          _New York Evening Post_

          LONDON, August 1.--Boiling over a slow
          fire is the happiest death a lobster can meet;
          so it has been determined at the Jersey Marine
          Biological Station. The experiments were carried
          out by Joseph Sinel, a well-known biologist, for
          the Jersey Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
          to Animals, whose members associated the prevalent
          method of killing lobsters with mediæval torture.

          Lobsters, says Mr. Sinel, are extremely difficult
          to kill. Piercing the brain does not seem to cause
          the lobster more than temporary annoyance, since
          his brain is a mere nerve ganglion the size of a
          hemp-seed. He has to be killed all over. To throw
          him into boiling water fails to do the work either
          mercifully or quickly, since he struggles violently
          to escape for about two minutes.

          The pleasantest way to end a lobster’s troubles,
          Mr. Sinel finds, is the old-fashioned way of
          placing him in cold water and bringing him to a
          boil. As the water warms, he becomes merely lazy
          and rolls over as for a sleep. By the time the
          water reaches the comparatively mild temperature of
          70 degrees, Fahrenheit, he becomes comatose. At 80
          degrees, he is dead. To use a human illustration,
          the biologist says it is like a person succumbing
          to a heat wave, with loss of consciousness and a
          painless end.

          *       *       *       *       *

          REPORT OF FEDERAL OFFICIAL

          _San Francisco Chronicle_

          WASHINGTON, January 15.--Asiatic immigration, the
          “Hindoo propaganda,” and particularly immigration
          to Continental United States from Hawaii and the
          Philippines, are discussed at length in the annual
          report of Anthony Caminetti, Commissioner-General
          of Immigration, made public here today.

          “I believe it is quite generally conceded that
          immigration from the Far East is detrimental to the
          welfare of the United States,” says the report,
          “not because it has heretofore been so extensive
          in numbers, but because of its peculiar effect
          upon the economic conditions and the possibilities
          of an almost unlimited increase in volume if left
          unregulated and unchecked. Our Oriental immigration
          problem, arising more than a quarter of a century
          ago, has never been satisfactorily solved; the
          exclusion laws need many amendments, not in purpose
          but in prescribed method.

          “The Hindoo propaganda, as yet in its infancy, is
          calculated to give much trouble unless promptly
          met with measures based upon, and modeled to take
          advantage of our past experience in trying to
          arrange practicable and thorough, but at the same
          time unobjectionable, plans for the protection of
          the country against an influx of aliens who can not
          be readily and healthfully assimilated by our body
          politic.”

          Of immigration by way of the insular possessions
          the Commissioner says: “It will be observed that
          15,512 aliens came to continental from insular
          United States during the last seven years--10,948
          from Hawaii, 3,950 from Porto Rico and 614 from the
          Philippines--and that of these, 10,740 landed at
          San Francisco, 3,910 at New York and 631 at Seattle.

          “Aliens coming from Porto Rico have been handled
          with a fair degree of success, but those coming
          from Hawaii and the Philippines have given the
          service a great deal of trouble, the former with
          regard to the admission of aliens to the territory
          and their subsequent migration to the continent,
          and the latter with respect to the coming of
          aliens to the mainland from the Philippines only,
          the immigration service having nothing to do
          with respect to the admission of aliens to these
          possessions.

          “It has been regarded as desirable to encourage
          the settlement in Hawaii of European aliens, and
          correspondingly to discourage the settlement there
          of aliens from the Orient, the idea being that the
          former does, and the latter does not, tend toward
          the ‘Americanization’ of the territory, which
          already has a large Asiatic population. Failure to
          retain the immigrants secured through the exercise
          by the Federal Government of a very liberal
          policy, is believed to be due to the fact that the
          conditions of work and labor are unsatisfactory and
          the standard of wages too low.”

          Of the flow of immigration the Commissioner says:

          “Immigration, judged from the results of the year,
          has apparently reached the million mark, and unless
          some affirmative action is taken by the Federal
          Government to restrict it, or steps are taken by
          European and other nations to reduce the steady
          stream of persons leaving the various countries
          of the Old World, we need hardly expect that
          the number annually entering the United States
          hereafter will fall far below 1,000,000.”

          Immigration to the United States for the fiscal
          year aggregated 1,218,480, only 66,869 less than
          for the year 1907, which showed the greatest tide
          of immigration in history. As 633,805 aliens left
          the United States during the year, the net increase
          of population through immigration was 769,276.

          Of the alien applicants for admission to the United
          States during the year, 33,041 were excluded on
          various statutory grounds, the debarments being 66
          per cent greater than for the previous year.

          The suggestion is made tentatively that some
          diversion of the immigrant fund be made to protect
          the immigrants after their landing in this country,
          in an effort “to relieve industrial centers by
          securing employment for the surplus labor found
          therein, whether native or foreign, either on farms
          or in other rural occupations or in settling people
          on lands.” Such relief would be, the report says,
          of benefit to all the people.




CHAPTER VIII

EXHIBITIONS, ENTERTAINMENTS, AND SPECIAL OCCASIONS


=Type of story.= News stories in this division may be grouped in
two classes: (1) those of display, such as exhibitions, shows, fairs,
and parades, and (2) those of banquets, holiday celebrations, and other
special occasions, such as college commencements. Although the subject
matter covers a wide range, the method of handling the news is much the
same.

=Purpose.= The aim in these stories is not only to portray
attractively the events and scenes but to bring out the spirit of the
occasion. There is generally a dominant note in all these events,
and the effectiveness of the description can be greatly heightened
by selecting those details that bring out this note. The selection
and presentation of details from the point of view of their value as
showing the mood of the occasion results in a story of much greater
interest than does the mere recording of the different incidents.
Accuracy in news stories of this kind, therefore, is not simply
faithfulness to fact, but truth of sentiment. Untruthfulness lies in
adding fictitious details in an effort to heighten the appeal, and in
substituting sentimentality for true sentiment.

=Treatment.= The chief problem in writing these stories is to
select picturesque and significant phases from the large mass of
available material, and to reproduce the scenes and incidents with
vividness. These events offer one of the few chances in news writing
for pure description. In general the description is of the so-called
dynamic type, in that all of the details are selected with the purpose
of bringing out one impression rather than of giving a complete picture.

In descriptions of holiday celebrations an emotional appeal is possible
because every festival and holiday has its own particular sentiment.
Christmas is distinctly the children’s day and is characterized by
generosity. Memorial day is marked by patriotic reverence for dead
heroes, Fourth of July by patriotic jollification, and Thanksgiving day
by the idea of feasting. For banquets and similar occasions in which
the spirit of good fellowship is the dominant note the descriptive
method in a lighter vein is particularly appropriate.

When speeches and toasts are delivered in connection with these
events, they are treated like other speeches and are fitted into the
story as incidents of the occasion, or, if they are of sufficient
significance, they may be played up as the feature.

          *       *       *       *       *

          AUTOMOBILE SHOW TO OPEN

          _New York Times_

          The National Automobile Chamber of Commerce will
          open its Fifteenth Annual National Automobile Show
          in Grand Central Palace next Saturday, Jan. 2.
          The Show Committee of the N. A. C. C., which has
          the exhibition in charge, consists of Col. George
          Pope, H. O. Smith, Wilfred C. Leland, and S. A.
          Miles, manager. Instead of opening at night, the
          doors will be unlocked at 2 P. M. Displays of goods
          conservatively valued at more than $3,500,000 will
          occupy the 150,000 square feet of floor space on
          four floors of the building. About 50,000 more
          square feet of floor space is available this year
          than in previous seasons.

          There is a total of 338 exhibits. Gasoline pleasure
          cars will be shown by eighty-one manufacturers; six
          companies will show electric cars, and thirteen
          will display motor cycles. The remaining 238
          exhibitors are makers of accessories. More than 400
          complete cars will be shown. These will be found to
          range in price from $295 to $7,500. No commercial
          cars will be exhibited, but there will be a
          special information bureau for commercial vehicle
          manufacturers.

          In order to make a beautiful setting for the cars
          and show them to advantage, the interior of the
          palace has been converted into a Persian palace.
          The decoration color scheme is white, gold,
          and crimson. The lobby of the building will be
          decorated to resemble a California garden.

          Following the custom of former years, Wednesday,
          Jan. 6, has been set aside as Society Day, upon
          which double admission will be charged. There will
          also be a Theatrical Day, Monday, Jan. 4, upon
          which representative players will be guests of the
          management. The exposition will remain open for
          one week, until Jan. 9. On the first day the doors
          will open at 2 P. M., and on other days at 10 A.
          M., with the exception of Sunday, when the building
          will remain closed.

          *       *       *       *       *

          POULTRY SHOW

          _New York Evening Post_

          The twentieth annual exhibition of the New York
          Poultry, Pigeon and Pet Stock Association was
          opened several hours before daybreak this morning
          with appropriate barnyard pomp and ceremony. One of
          the 6,500 fowl assembled in Madison Square Garden,
          with bold disregard for the conventions of city
          life, started things at 3 A. M., and in an instant
          the whole family was flapping its wings and crowing
          sociably one to another.

          Even though it was only the light from an arc lamp
          outside, which the birds mistook for the rising
          sun, they resolved to make the best of it, and at
          noon all the inmates were in excellent voice.

          The great arena, filled row upon row with every
          variety of domestic fowl, resounded with echoes of
          the farm.

          It was one long, continuous cock-a-doodle-doo, that
          gave the impression that all the barnyards of the
          world had suddenly been combined in one.

          A flock of white Wyandottes, looking very pompous,
          supplied the baritone parts of the medley, while
          occasionally a peevish falsetto cackle could be
          discerned issuing from the bantam household.
          Melodious squawks from several turkey gobblers,
          who had escaped the axe this season, added to the
          hoarse cackle of numerous ducks, helped to fill in
          the gaps.

          One change was noticeable to-day in the absence
          of Canadian-bred birds. In former years, fowl
          from across the border have been among the most
          interesting in the exhibit, affording a basis for
          comparison of the poultry of the two countries.

          But, owing to the strict quarantine regulations
          now in force, officers of the New York State
          Association found it impossible to include this
          feature in this year’s show. The fact that there
          are no Canadian entries is accountable for the
          smaller number of exhibits, some six hundred
          Canadian specimens having been withheld by the
          Canadian fanciers. The reason, it was stated, was
          the prevalence of disease among cattle at the
          present time. The Canadian inspectors had announced
          that they would not allow consignments shipped to
          the exhibition to reënter the country.

          All States north of the Ohio and east of the
          Mississippi have sent specimens to the exhibit,
          while a number of Southern and Western States are
          represented also.

          On the main floor the entire space is devoted to
          fowl, of every variety, displayed in steel cages.
          The centre of the arena is occupied by a small
          tank, used as a duck pond, and grouped around this
          are several large cages, containing specially rare
          specimens. The balcony, circling the enclosure, is
          devoted to pigeons and pet stock, including guinea
          pigs, rabbits, and white mice.

          Along with the poultry display, there is the usual
          accompaniment of farmyard devices, brooders,
          incubators, and patent feeders, which occupy
          booths in various parts of the main floor. John,
          a fine white Wyandotte cock from Jersey, was on
          hand to-day to do his share in exhibiting a device
          for grinding bones. He was hitched to a miniature
          mill, in which he had been trained for months to
          make the circuit like a horse. But everything at
          the Garden was so different, and so unlike life in
          the peaceful Jersey farm, that the rooster had an
          attack of stage-fright and couldn’t navigate the
          turn. He crouched down in the traces and refused to
          budge, while the demonstrator applied persuasion
          and a horsewhip to coax him on.

          But the trained hens, who were there to show how a
          combination “feeder and exerciser” worked, lived up
          to expectations, and gave an admirable performance.
          They were caged in a shed with a miniature
          turnstile in it, and every time they took a few
          steps, the stile was sure to move, bringing down
          upon their heads a shower of corn.

          *       *       *       *       *

          AGRICULTURAL FAIR

          _Boston Herald_

          SALEM, N. H., Aug. 21--Fair skies, weather of
          ideal coolness, the grand circuit races, a horse
          show of unusual excellence, pedigreed cattle
          and blue-blooded poultry, fruit and vegetables
          that made the onlooker hungry, in fact, all the
          accessories of half a dozen county fairs rolled
          into one--not forgetting the Looney Lane and its
          leather-lunged ballyhoo men--lured to Rockingham
          Park today a crowd variously estimated at between
          60,000 and 80,000 persons.

          Whatever the correct figures of attendance may have
          been, it is certain that the grand stands were
          jammed solid with cheering humanity, that men,
          women and children of all ages and types swarmed
          like a colony of ants through the various exhibits,
          and that automobiles of every kind known to the
          trade were paraded all over the parking space.

          It was a happy, good-natured crowd, in which the
          millionaire rubbed elbows with the farm boy,
          and those who came by trolley had just as much
          chance for enjoyment as those who came in the most
          expensive touring car. To be sure, the horse is the
          star performer at Rockingham fair, but that is no
          reason why the other features should be overlooked,
          and they were not.

          This was Governor’s day on the program, but in
          reality it might better have been described as
          Everybody’s day. At least, that is the way it
          looked to the visitor. Gov. Samuel D. Felker of New
          Hampshire was on hand, of course, with Mrs. Felker
          and members of his staff.

          He was received fittingly with the customary brass
          band accompaniment, was whisked across the track in
          a miniature procession of automobiles and escorted
          to the grandstand. There he made an appropriate
          speech, or went through an animated pantomime, the
          impression differing with the distance the listener
          was from him. At any rate, the crowd judged him
          by his good intentions and applauded heartily.
          Gov. Foss was unable to be present, but was well
          represented by Mrs. Foss and his two pretty
          daughters.

          “Something doing every minute” seems to have been
          the motto of the fair management, and the motto
          was well observed. Apart from the racing, the fair
          has enough attractions to keep a visitor busy for
          a couple of days at least, and then said visitor
          would be better satisfied if he could possess
          himself of an extra set of eyes.

          The effect of the place is kaleidoscopic, or rather
          that of a talking moving picture run wild. It is
          a perfect jumble of color and sound. Bands are
          playing, husky barkers are shouting, bulls are
          bellowing, cows are lowing, sheep are baaing, hens
          are cackling, auto horns are tooting--all off the
          key but in a pleasant discordance.

          And people--as an exhibit of the plain people and
          of the varnished people, too, the place has few
          rivals. There is the man from back in the hills,
          whose bucolic chin whisker wags in rapture over
          some particular breed of hogs, and there is the
          landed proprietor, who is as interested as an
          amateur in some particular strain of stock. You
          see an overalled individual drawling casual orders
          to a stolid yoke of oxen, and then, turning again,
          you come upon Arthur Waldo in the pink of sartorial
          neatness, sizing up a prize sheep.

          There is contrast everywhere. If you are looking
          for the latest in horsey fashion, stroll about
          the grandstand, and if you want to see what the
          agriculturist considers a good all-purpose costume,
          run down to the sheds. Young America with his best
          girl is much in evidence in the vicinity of the
          ice-cream cone and lemonade stand, and Old America
          is there, too, just as young as any of them.

          Away over behind the grandstand are the cattle
          sheds, where one may fill his eye with as many
          different kinds of cows, bulls and oxen as he
          ever imagined. There they are--the Jerseys, the
          Guernseys, the Holsteins, the Ayrshires, and
          whatever other kinds there be, all beautifully
          groomed, with horns polished. Some are decked
          with blue ribbons and some with red, and some
          which have no ribbons at all appear about as good
          as their rivals. Out in the field to the rear,
          quiet men take technical notice of good points of
          competitors, and make the awards without any fuss.

          Judges are everywhere. They are busy with cattle
          and they are busy with hens and with geese, with
          hogs--there is a whole exhibit of blue ones--with
          fish, with fruit, with vegetables, with embroidery
          and with needlework. By the way, the housewife
          should not be overlooked, for the skill of the
          woman of the Rebeccas and the Granges, either with
          the needle or the cook-stove, is not to be despised.

          There is much to attract the serious-minded, and
          for those who are not so serious there is the
          Looney Lane. It is a long lane, a good half mile,
          if not more. And there is to be found about every
          side show that ingenuity has yet devised.

          The streets of this midway are dense, and the
          business flourishing. You can try your luck on a
          “beautiful, blue-eyed baby-doll,” or a teddy-bear,
          on umbrellas, on rings, on stickpins and a variety
          of other useful commodities. You can visit strange
          oriental houris, see the wild girl, or pay your
          money for some allurement that is “for men only.”
          Lady wrestlers, diving girls, freaks without
          number, even the “original cigarette fiend” are all
          to be viewed “for the trifling and inconsiderable
          expenditure of one dime.” But what’s the use--they
          are all there with “spielers” to match.

          With the exception of the races, probably the most
          interesting feature was the horse show. Yesterday’s
          program was one of unusual excellence, and ran
          through several of the most striking classes of
          saddle horses and hunters and jumpers.

          The Lawson cup, presented by Thomas W. Lawson, for
          gig horses not under 15.1 or over 15.3 hands, went
          to Sir James, Alfred G. Vanderbilt’s entry. Glen
          Riddle’s The Virginian carried off the Copley-Plaza
          cup in the Corinthian class, and Mr. Riddle was
          again fortunate in capturing the Andrew Adie cup in
          the class for hunt teams of three each.

          One of the prettiest classes of the afternoon was
          that for park four-in-hands with lady drivers,
          which was won by Mrs. P. T. Roche of Leominster,
          after a skillful exhibition. Another spectacular
          number was the tandem race, a one-mile dash on the
          race track, which was won by P. T. Roche.

          *       *       *       *       *

          OPENING OF MARKET

          _New York Times_

          Crowds of many thousands filled Washington Market
          yesterday to celebrate the formal reopening of
          the building since it has been reconstructed and
          converted into a model market of glass, marble,
          porcelain, enamel, and nickel flooded with light
          from a series of large overhead windows.

          The ceremonies began with the arrival of a
          procession with a band at its head, city officials
          in automobiles following and the forty exempt
          firemen with their antiquated engines bringing
          up the rear. The main floor and galleries were
          thronged, and hundreds of persons had to be turned
          away while the speechmaking was going on.

          Mayor Mitchel said that the reopening of Washington
          Market as a modern institution was only a step in
          the plan to dot the city with model markets.

          “The new Washington Market,” he said, “is a link
          in a chain of retail markets which I hope that
          the city will some time own and control. Such a
          system of retail markets will be a part of a still
          more comprehensive system of food distribution.
          The entire plan will comprise wholesale terminal
          markets which will receive supplies of all kinds
          for distribution with the least possible handling
          and waste and will have a marked effect in keeping
          down the cost of living.

          “We want to reduce the cost of bringing food
          into the city, and this can be done by means of
          better transit facilities with terminal markets to
          increase the convenience of the people of this city
          in buying at retail in some of the finest and most
          sanitary markets in the world. The plans are only
          now in the process of formation and I hope that the
          people will support the city officials in bringing
          them to completion.”

          George McAneny, President of the Board of Aldermen,
          briefly reviewed the history of the market and of
          its reconstruction.

          “This building was a disgrace to the city four
          years ago,” he said. “But the new building is
          offered as a promise that this in time shall be
          the standard of all markets of the city. The start
          toward the reconstruction of Washington Market
          was made six years ago by the money saved through
          other economies. We saved nearly $500,000 from the
          $3,000,000 given to us to use and $43,000 of this
          saving went toward the remodeled market.”

          The history of Washington Market and a detailed
          explanation of the great improvements that had been
          made were given by Matthew Micolino, President
          of the Washington Market Merchants’ Association.
          Others on the speakers’ platform were Ralph Folks,
          Commissioner of Public Works; Simon Steiner, one of
          the oldest dealers in Washington Market, and Mrs.
          Julian Heath, President of the National Housewives’
          League.

          Borough President Marcus M. Marks, Chairman
          of the Market Committee, who called up on the
          long-distance telephone from San Francisco when he
          was at the exposition to settle some of the details
          of the market and to decide on the date of its
          opening, told yesterday of the visits paid to the
          old market by Edward VII. when he was Prince of
          Wales and by Presidents Grant, Garfield, Arthur,
          and Cleveland. He added:

          “Presidents bring honor, but residents bring
          business. I wish you both--business and honor.
          The oysterman, Cornelius Vanderbilt, was among
          those who in early days helped to make the market
          a success. In the old building the business had
          been carried up to more than $5,000,000 a year,
          and I prophesy that your business will run up to
          $10,000,000 a year.”

          Controller Prendergast said that the new market
          ought to arouse the people of the city to the
          possibilities of having a fine market system.

          “We have been trying to solve the market problem
          through three or four unrelated departments,” he
          said, “but nothing can be accomplished without
          central authority. Last Spring we asked the
          Legislature for authority to amend our charter
          to provide for a Department of Markets, but it
          refused. I think this was a great mistake. We shall
          make the same application again this Winter. If the
          new Constitution goes through we will ask the Board
          of Aldermen to pass a bill creating such a body.”

          During the week the special exhibits will occupy
          places in the galleries. Up in the gallery is a
          woman suffrage booth, from which printed arguments
          in favor of giving women the vote were distributed
          yesterday, with oral arguments for those who stayed
          to listen. In another corner of the gallery the
          National Security League had an exhibition of
          modern small arms and various charts showing the
          low rank in military strength held by this country
          in comparison with other powers. The National
          Housewives’ League had a booth from which advice on
          reducing the cost of living was issued and various
          patent foods were advertised.

          Today will be given over to an exposition of the
          pure food principles for which the market stands.
          The speakers will be Alfred W. McCann, Joseph
          Hartigan, Commissioner of Weights and Measures;
          John Boschen, Sidney H. Goodacre, and Frank H.
          Hines. Tomorrow will be suffrage day and Thursday
          the day of the National Housewives’ League. Friday
          and Saturday will be market days, with reduced
          prices on everything.

          *       *       *       *       *

          OPENING OF TUNNEL

          _Chicago Record-Herald_

          NEW YORK, Feb. 26, 2 a. m.--Just at midnight
          an electric train, jammed to its capacity with
          marveling passengers, slipped out of the Nineteenth
          street station, darted down beneath the Hudson
          River and, a few moments later, pulled into the
          terminus at Hoboken, N. J.

          This train was the first actual passenger train
          to run through the new $60,000,000 tunnel and
          submarine system which connects New York and New
          Jersey, and which had been officially opened at
          3:40 o’clock yesterday afternoon, by the pressure
          of the presidential finger on a gold-mounted
          telegraph key on President Roosevelt’s desk at the
          White House.

          At the instant the signal flashed over the wires
          from Washington, the power was thrown into the
          machinery and the first official train of the
          Hudson and Manhattan Railroad Company, which
          constructed the tunnel, started on its way.

          Governor Hughes of New York, Governor Fort of
          New Jersey, city officials and railroad men of
          prominence, 800 altogether, were in the official
          party.

          The official train carried eight cars, all of them
          filled to overflowing. Millionaires joined the
          ranks of the straphangers on this occasion, E.
          H. Harriman among the number, while further down
          the same car Cornelius Vanderbilt was propped up
          against a door jamb.

          Under the bed of the river midway through the tube
          the train hesitated for a moment where the boundary
          line between New York and New Jersey was marked by
          a chain of glittering incandescent lights. The two
          governors arose and clasped hands, and then the
          train dashed on and climbed out of the big hole
          into the Hoboken depot of the Delaware, Lackawanna
          and Western Railroad.

          There a jollification meeting was held over the
          successful accomplishment of a task which has been
          repeatedly attempted, but without results until
          William McAdoo took hold. Governors Hughes and
          Fort were the chief speakers and there were short
          addresses by representatives of the railroads and
          of the cities interested. President Roosevelt sent
          a personal letter to President McAdoo, which was
          read.

          The letter follows:

            Feb. 17, 1908. My Dear Mr. McAdoo:--Now that a
            beginning is to be made in opening for operation
            the Hudson tunnel system, I write to express my
            regret that I cannot be present in person, and my
            high appreciation of what you have accomplished.
            The tunneling of the Hudson River is indeed a
            notable achievement--one of those achievements
            of which all Americans are, as they should be,
            justly proud. The tunnel itself and the great
            buildings constructed in connection therewith
            represent a work of extraordinary magnitude,
            represent extraordinary difficulties successfully
            overcome, while difficulty and magnitude are even
            surpassed by the usefulness of the achievement.
            The whole system is practically below tidal
            water, and this makes it much the greatest
            subaqueous tunnel in the world. It is a bigger
            undertaking than any Alpine tunnel which has yet
            been constructed, and the successful completion
            represents the moving of New Jersey bodily three
            miles nearer to New York in point of time and
            immensely increases the ease of access from one
            state to the other. You who have brought this
            great achievement to a successful conclusion
            ought to be most heartily congratulated. It is
            the kind of business achievement which is in the
            highest degree creditable to the American people,
            and for which American people should feel and
            publicly acknowledge their hearty gratitude.
            Sincerely yours,
                       THEODORE ROOSEVELT.

          After the oratory, the guests were escorted through
          the imposing system of underground terminals at the
          New Jersey end of the tube, and then the official
          party retraversed the tunnel to New York.

          Last night, the celebration of the event, which is
          believed to be the first step in a great system
          of tunnels under the Hudson, was continued with a
          banquet at Sherry’s. The regular service began with
          the starting of the first train at midnight.

          President Roosevelt pressed the button which
          formally opened the tunnel at 3:40 o’clock eastern
          time, yesterday afternoon, immediately following
          the receipt of this telegram from President McAdoo:

          The first official train of the Hudson and
          Manhattan Railroad Company, under the Hudson River,
          awaits your signal and pleasure.

          *       *       *       *       *

          UNVEILING OF STATUE

          _New York Evening Post_

          With the unveiling on Monday of the new statue
          on Riverside Drive, Jeanne d’Arc takes her place
          permanently in New York city. New York is not
          the most natural of settings for Jeanne d’Arc,
          burgerette of Domremy-sur-Meuse, warrior, woman
          saint of France, but since she is to be here, the
          Drive is a good place for her. There is an open
          sweep of view there, and hills beyond. And, in
          early mornings, and at twilight when the lights
          on the river begin to show coral in the blue-gray
          mist, something very like the spirit of the city is
          made visible.

          It is this same characteristic--the seeing of the
          invisible, the touching of the intangible--which is
          in the statue and makes it what it is. Anna Vaughn
          Hyatt, its sculptor, sees only the spiritual in
          Jeanne, and in her work she holds indefinitely for
          us the moment after the finding of the consecrated
          sword, which Jeanne holds high over her head as
          she stands erect in her saddle, her head thrown
          back in exaltation. The horse is all but prancing.
          There is something of certainty and joyousness
          about the whole which could be inspired by nothing
          purely material or temporal. The upward gesture
          of the sword is not without meaning--it is the
          natural movement of a person who has had a great
          revelation, a deep creative instinct. She is
          holding the sword up to God.

          The idea of the statue for this city, to celebrate
          the five hundredth anniversary of the birth of
          Jeanne in 1412, and to be made by an American woman
          sculptor, is about six years old, and originated
          with J. Sanford Saltus and George Frederick Kunz.
          They are, respectively, the honorary president and
          president of the Joan of Arc Statue Committee,
          founded December 4, 1909, of which Gabriel Hanotaux
          and Pierre Loti, membres de l’Institut Français,
          are the honorary vice-presidents. The work has
          taken time and it has been well done. Besides the
          Committee of twenty-four members, and the sculptor
          herself, there was an architect, Prof. John V.
          Van Pelt, a landscape architect, Carl F. Pilat, a
          consultant on armor, Bashford Dean, Ph.D., curator
          of armor at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Cass
          Gilbert, adviser of architectural competition, a
          jury on architectural competition, and a Committee
          of the Municipal Art Commission on Whole Design.

          The whole idea has been a combination of the
          American with the French. Miss Hyatt herself is of
          French descent and has studied largely in France.
          The very foundation of the statue is made of stones
          from the Tower of Rouen, in which Jeanne was
          confined.

          And the dedication at 2:30 on Monday afternoon,
          at Riverside Drive and 93d Street, to which
          twenty-one societies and institutes, both French
          and American, will send delegations, bears out the
          idea well. These delegations will come from the
          American Scenic and Historic Preservation Society,
          the Alliance Française de New York, the American
          Numismatic Society, the Daughters of the American
          Revolution, Daughters of the Revolution, Fédération
          de l’Alliance Française aux Etats-Unis, Fine Arts
          Federation, France-America Committee, Jeanne D’Arc
          Home, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Museum of French
          Art, Institut Français aux Etats-Unis, National
          Academy of Design, National Sculpture Society, New
          York Historical Society, Société des Architects
          Diplomés par le Gouvernement, Société Nationale
          des Professeurs Français, Society of Beaux Arts
          Architects, Society of the United States Daughters
          of 1812, Society of the War of 1812, Sons of the
          American Revolution, Sons of the Revolution.

          The service of dedication will open with the
          American National Anthem played by the French
          Band of the Lafayette Guards. The Very Rev.
          Théophile Wucher, pastor of the French Church of
          St. Vincent de Paul, will give the invocation,
          Dr. Kunz the address of welcome, and J. Sanford
          Saltus the address of presentation. The statue
          will be unveiled by Mrs. Thomas A. Edison, one of
          the Committee members, and the unveiling will be
          followed by the French National Anthem and salute.
          After the statue has been received in the name of
          the city by Park Commissioner Cabot Ward, a letter
          of congratulation from President Wilson will be
          read and addresses will be made by J. J. Jusserand,
          French Ambassador to the United States; Robert W.
          de Forest, LL.D., president of the Metropolitan
          Museum of Art; McDougall Hawkes, president of
          the Museum of French Art, l’Institut Français aux
          Etats-Unis; Professor Delamarre, secretary-general
          of the Federation de l’Alliance Française aux
          Etats-Unis, and J. Alden Weir, president of the
          National Academy of Design. If the weather is not
          fair on Monday, these exercises will be held in the
          American Museum of Natural History.

          President Wilson’s letter which will be placed in
          the pedestal with letters from Governor Whitman and
          leading city officials, says:

          “My dear Dr. Kunz:

          “I hope that on Monday, December the sixth, you
          will convey to the Joan of Arc Statue Committee
          my warmest congratulations upon the successful
          completion of their work.

          “Joan of Arc is one of those ideal historic figures
          to whom the thought of patriotic people turns back
          for inspiration. In her seems to have been embodied
          the pure enthusiasm which makes for all that is
          heroic and poetic.
              “Cordially and sincerely yours,
                          “WOODROW WILSON.”

          This statue is the fifteenth equestrian statue of
          Jeanne d’Arc, but it is the first one made by a
          woman. Thirteen of these are in France, and one in
          Philadelphia. The figure of the Maid was modelled
          after Clara Hunter Hyatt, the sculptor’s niece,
          but the face is idealistic, giving Miss Hyatt’s
          own conception of the way Jeanne looked. The
          horse was modelled in Paris, but the final work
          for the statue was done in Miss Hyatt’s Studio in
          Annisquam, Massachusetts, where she worked almost
          entirely outdoors. A model of this statue has been
          placed in the Cathedral at Blois where Jeanne was
          confirmed and a bronze copy will be placed in front
          of the Cathedral as soon as the money can be raised.

          Especially numerous are the statues and memorials
          of Jeanne in and around Domremy, now called
          Domremy-la-Pucelle in her honor. A statue of her
          by E. Paul, erected in 1885, stands in front of
          the village church and above the door is a mural
          painting by Balze representing her as she listened
          to the Voices. In the garden of the cottage where
          she was born, near to the church, is a group by
          Mercié showing her as she left her home led by the
          Genius of France, and over the door are the royal
          arms of France and those given to Jeanne and her
          family. In a niche above is a kneeling figure of a
          girl, made about 1456, and the cottage has become
          almost a museum, filled with small belongings
          of Jeanne herself. It is hard to come back from
          Domremy-la-Pucelle to the corner of Riverside Drive
          and 93d Street. But, even here, the Maid may feel
          not entirely homeless. She brings her joy and her
          certainty with her, and at twilight, if she glances
          out over the river to the hills, she may find,
          where the lights show coral through the mist, a
          glimpse of things unseen.

          *       *       *       *       *

          Note--_The next two stories, which describe a
          pageant parade, should be compared with reference
          to style and tone._

          AUTOMOBILE PAGEANT PARADE

          (1)

          _New York Herald_

          More than three thousand automobiles, many of them
          handsomely decorated and illuminated, helped to
          impress upon throngs of spectators in the city
          streets last night the fact that great strides have
          been made in the development of both pleasure and
          service vehicles. The pageant, which was a feature
          of the Tercentenary celebration, also gave to
          thousands an hour of brightness and pleasure.

          The parade started in Harlem, and, after covering
          the principal streets there, swept down town and
          passed the reviewing stand in front of the New York
          Public Library. Governor Glynn and Mayor Mitchel
          reached the stand at the head of the column. They
          were accompanied, the Governor by his staff, and
          Mayor Mitchel by prominent citizens.

          As both officials had other engagements, they
          left before the second division arrived, but they
          enjoyed seeing the motorcycles dash past, many in
          grotesque decorations.

          As one of the motorcycles sped down Fifth avenue
          below Forty-second street it encountered a big
          automobile. Policemen managed to draw them apart.

          One of the amusing features of the division was the
          musicians riding on motorcycles. They had on war
          bonnets and were escorted by a band of Indians.

          One young woman in white duck trousers, coat and
          cap, her costume being the counterpart of that
          of her male companion, attracted a good deal of
          attention, as the two sped past the official stand.

          The celerity with which this division went down
          Fifth avenue led spectators who filled the three
          stands--the Governor’s at the south, the Mayor’s
          in the centre and a third at the north of the
          block--as well as the thousands forming a solid
          mass along the streets, to believe that the pageant
          would move quickly. But a wait of almost half an
          hour ensued after the passing of the “Indians.”

          At last the intercepted line of decorated
          automobiles began to appear, and for more than an
          hour there was an unceasing flashing of brilliant
          lights, massed flowers, bunting, pennants and
          flags, all of which formed attractive decorations.

          “Neutrality” was greeted with applause when an
          automobile filled with young women dressed in the
          national colors whizzed by the judges’ box. “He
          Comes Up Smiling,” showing an unusually tall man
          wearing bathroom attire, who frequently plunged
          into the depths of a huge bathtub, brought forth
          shouts.

          The suffragists had four automobiles in one
          division. These were decorated with “votes for
          women” colors and pennants and big banners across
          the tonneau with “Victory in 1915” in black letters
          on yellow or blue.

          Louis Annis Ames acted as grand marshal and William
          G. Poertner was marshal. The judges of decorated
          cars were George W. Breck, W. A. Boring, Alan R.
          Hawley, William W. Knowles, Harry H. Good, E. A.
          McCoy and William H. Page. The associate judges
          of the automobile division were Alfred Reeves and
          C. F. Clarkson; of the motorcycle division, F. V.
          Clark and J. L. Sauer, and of the advertising, O.
          J. Gude, William H. Jones, Russell Field, A. M. Van
          Buren and George B. Van Cleve.

          A reception to Governor Glynn and Mayor Mitchel was
          held after the parade at the Automobile Club of
          America, No. 247 West Fifty-fourth street.

          *       *       *       *       *

          (2)

          _New York World_

          Have you ever been in a smoking car when the man
          in the seat ahead was trying to prove that forced
          draught does not improve the natural perfume of a
          rubber plant in a cigar make-up? If you have not
          it will be impossible to bring to you from last
          night the atmosphere of the automobile parade in
          celebration of New York’s three hundredth business
          birthday.

          The fact that many of the automobiles were
          charmingly decorated proved nothing except that one
          can never tell by the band what sort of smoke it is
          wrapped around.

          Take a pretty light blue scarf of oil smudge
          and weave it about festoons of parti-colored
          incandescent globes suspended along the sidewalks,
          and you have the scene at Fifth avenue and
          Forty-second street last night, as the parade
          snorted past the reviewing stand in front of the
          public library.

          The plan was to have Gov. Glynn and Mayor Mitchel
          sit in the stand and watch the parade go by. But
          the Governor and the Mayor had so many other
          engagements last night that they started with the
          parade, arrived half an hour before it, and got
          away before the parade arrived at the reviewing
          stand.

          Fortunately, however, most persons in the
          automobiles did not know that, and the men saluted
          just as correctly, and the women bowed just as
          sweetly, as if the rulers were on the job--so
          nobody could see that it made much difference that
          they were not.

          Officials in charge said that the reason the
          motorcycle portion of the parade arrived about
          half an hour before the next section was that the
          motorcycles could not stop or they would tip over.
          The fact that there were several long gaps in the
          parade was due to no fault of theirs, the officials
          added.

          The gaps gave spectators--when they weren’t
          thinking how chilly it had got all of a sudden--a
          chance to observe how neat and roomy the Fifth
          avenue roadway looks when there is no traffic on
          it. Many persons thought this the most remarkable
          sight of the evening.

          More than 2,000 automobiles and trucks and 1,000
          motorcycles were in line. Prizes worth more than
          $6,000 had been offered--$5,000 worth by the
          Tercentenary Commission.

          By way of proving that some persons will try
          anything once to win a prize, women in some of
          the most beautifully gotten up cars failed to put
          on the same amount of clothes they would fail to
          put on if they were going to the opera. Nobody
          denied that this was a fetching idea in automobile
          decorations--but it was cold enough last night to
          wear at least a necklace, which, indeed, some of
          those women did.

          Among the floats was one advertising a make of
          auto tire. Two gigantic human shaped figures, made
          of tiring--or whatever they call the stuff they
          make tires of--wobbled about on a big float. Then
          there was a man who kept coming up smiling from
          the depths of a big bathtub. When one saw him at a
          distance one was thrilled, but on nearer view one
          perceived that he was really wearing tights.

          The Peace Float, the Santa Claus Ship (which
          The World is going to send to Europe laden with
          presents for the fatherless), The World’s own
          float, showing the way New York got its news three
          hundred years ago and the way it gets it to-day
          (in The World, of course), the Woman Suffrage
          automobiles, and private machines covered with
          flowers, were among the entries which drew applause
          from a quarter million persons who banked the line
          of march from One Hundred and Twenty-fifth street
          and Madison avenue through numerous other streets,
          including Broadway and Fifth avenue to the point of
          dispersal at Columbus Circle.

          It might be mentioned that Ralph De Palma,
          automobile racer, carrying officials in his car,
          and under instructions to hustle from the tail
          to the head of the parade, bumped into a touring
          car at Fifty-seventh street and Fifth avenue. The
          touring car lost a mudguard.

          A reception for Gov. Glynn and Mayor Mitchel, who
          are Honorary Presidents of the Commission, was held
          in the Automobile Club of America after the parade.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MEMORIAL DAY PARADE

          _New York Times_

          Eight hundred white-haired veterans of the
          civil war paraded yesterday under faded and
          bullet-riddled flags in the Memorial Day procession
          along Riverside Drive from Seventy-fourth Street
          to Ninety-second Street. Because it was the
          fiftieth anniversary of the end of their days on
          the battlefield, because the Grand Army men had
          felt the vibration of patriotic feeling in the
          atmosphere, and because it was a perfect day, the
          soldiers of the civil war, in spite of the waste
          in their ranks which old age had made in recent
          years, turned out yesterday in greater number than
          they have at any Memorial Day procession in the
          preceding three years.

          The weather brought out great crowds along the
          Drive and in other parts of the city where
          Memorial Day exercises of one kind or another were
          held. With the sky cloudless and the sun shining
          brilliantly, breezes from the Hudson River kept the
          marchers and the spectators cool and put life even
          into flags which shells and time had almost reduced
          to ribbons.

          Probably more than 50,000 people had gathered
          along the line of march. As the crowd was larger
          it was also more enthusiastic than usual. The big
          demonstrations were, of course, for the game old
          men and the pathetic ruins of their colors. In
          spite of the fact that the majority of them had
          passed three score and ten and that many crippled
          by old wounds and age had to carry canes, they
          responded quickly to tactical orders from their
          commanders and as a body moved with the precision
          of a smooth-running war machine.

          Receiving cheers and shouts of encouragement at
          every block, they were kept busy smiling and
          saluting. They passed thousands and thousands of
          American flags, as a large proportion of those in
          the crowd carried small ones. Flags were hung out
          of windows all along the Drive.

          The flag display throughout the city yesterday, as
          well as along the line of march of the procession,
          was the greatest the city has seen since Spanish
          war days at least. Along many of the residence
          streets flags hung in clusters. Along Broadway,
          wherever there was a flagpole, there was a large
          flag out, while small ones by thousands flapped
          from windows and thousands of tiny ones stuck out
          of buttonholes.

          Special cheers along the line of march were given
          for the twelve doughty old Zouaves who appeared in
          faded red baggy trousers with the characteristic
          jacket and tasseled fez. Also the crowds approved
          noisily of occasional ranks of veterans who
          appeared with swords drawn and the blades flashing
          brightly.

          One of the marchers who was cheered all the way
          along the route was George Sebech of Reno Post,
          No. 44, who carried medals for service both in the
          Mexican and in the civil war. He marched sturdily,
          and continually saluted and waved his hat at the
          ovation he received. He said:

          “I am 98 years old, but I’ll be marching here ten
          years from now, when these Spanish war boys are
          getting gray.”

          A platoon of mounted police formed the head of the
          column and was followed by a battalion of regular
          troops of the Coast Artillery. Next came the First
          Division of the National Guard, commanded by Major
          Gen. John F. O’Ryan. Following were the survivors
          of the Grand Army, headed by the Grand Marshal,
          Commander Sherburne C. Van Tassel, who rode a
          bay charger. The members of his staff were Adjt.
          Gen. Joseph B. Lord, Past Grand Marshals William
          E. Van Wyck, George M. Barry, Samuel Mildenburg,
          Isidore Isaacs, George H. Stevens, George S. Drew,
          Simpson Hamburger, and William Kirchner, Assistant
          Adjutants M. B. Wood, John H. Wood, Charles W.
          Brown, H. J. Kearney, Frank J. Schleder, Harry
          B. Dennison, E. K. Fassett, William H. Elliott,
          Captain Howard M. Graff, Chief Aid and Aids David
          Loria, Hugh Fitzpatrick, Henry Holmes, Charles
          Farmer, Daniel D. Lawlor, Theodore Joffe, and
          George Blair.

          The guard of honor to the Grand Marshal included
          Farragut Naval Post, No. 516; Farragut Fleet, Port
          of New York; the Monitor Association, Port of
          Brooklyn; the Ella Bixby Tent, No. 18, Daughters of
          Veterans, and Adams Goss Post, No. 330.

          There were four divisions of Grand Army Posts,
          and in the other divisions marched several
          columns of Spanish War veterans in khaki and blue
          flannel, numerous fife and drum corps, bands and
          semi-military organizations.

          In the reviewing stand at Eighty-ninth Street were
          Rear Admirals C. D. Sigsbee, General N. W. Day,
          General Anson G. McCook, Colonel George E. Dewey,
          Colonel James E. March, General Horace Porter,
          Colonel C. Blakewell, and Captain J. B. Greenhut,
          besides many city officials and prominent men.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHRISTMAS

          _Washington Times_

          Santa Claus, Inc., President of the Christmas Cheer
          Corporation. Organized in the District of Columbia
          under charter of December 24, 1915.

          It had to come. The job was getting too big for one
          jovial, rotund man, and he was afraid he would miss
          some chimneys. So Santa, this year, is a captain of
          industry, operating in every home in the District
          of Columbia, and in institutions as well, and so
          far the Sherman anti-trust law hasn’t got him.

          Sleighs were too slow. Anyway there isn’t any snow.
          Bells were too noisy.

          The motor truck has taken the place of the sleigh.
          And instead of depending upon his own efforts,
          Santa has enlisted practically every organization,
          every lodge, every society, every church, every
          settlement house and every mission, and thousands
          of individuals in his gigantic Christmas cheer
          enterprise.

          Like all great magnates, Santa is not seen by
          his workers. But his spirit presides over the
          entire project, and societies, clubs, groups and
          individuals are working busily in his name.

          Every church, for example, is planning its annual
          Christmas celebration. An effort is being made this
          year to have every church provide for the poor in
          its territory, and, instead of the erstwhile custom
          of giving gifts to its own members, many Sunday
          schools have applied to the Associated Charities
          for names of families to whom they might carry
          Christmas dinners and other gifts.

          For the homeless of the District the Salvation
          Army, the Gospel Mission, and the Central Union
          Mission are giving turkey dinners, to be followed
          by Christmas trees for those children where the
          home Christmas might not be as happy as it should
          be.

          At the Associated Charities volunteers are busily
          working today arranging baskets to be taken to the
          homes of families on that organization’s list,
          and in every case the Christmas dinner will be
          accompanied by some gift more lasting, such as a
          quantity of coal or clothing. These gifts are paid
          for from special contributions to the Christmas
          fund, and they are in addition to the fourteen
          “opportunities” by which the Associated Charities,
          co-operating with the newspapers of the city, hopes
          to make fourteen homes happy throughout the year.

          At both the Central Union and the Gospel Missions
          turkey dinners will be served, and at the Salvation
          Army there will be a Christmas breakfast in
          addition to the dinner.

          In enlarging the scope of his work and his force of
          helpers, Santa Claus has not forgotten that he is
          primarily the patron saint of children. One of his
          principal helpers is the Santa Claus girl, whose
          home at 70 Seaton place is piled high with gifts
          for those children whose names have been furnished
          through charity organizations, or by friends, and
          by letters written to Santa Claus.

          Dolls, drums, engines, skates, sweaters, and
          everything in which the child heart delights are
          piled high at the headquarters of the Christ Child
          Society, 929 G street, awaiting distribution among
          poor children. This year there are 2,000 names on
          the list to receive presents.

          Miss Mary V. Merrick is in charge of this work, and
          she has been assisted by Miss Charlotte Campbell,
          Mrs. James Gowel, Miss Florence Roach and Miss A.
          Ives. Scores of dolls were contributed by the doll
          guild, of which Miss Leta Montgomery is director.
          Sewing circles have given large quantities of
          clothing and the American Security and Trust
          Company has provided vans for the distribution of
          the bundles.

          Entire Government departments will celebrate
          Christmas; other Government bureaus, business
          houses, and military posts will have community
          celebrations.

          An unusual celebration will take place this evening
          in the office of the chief clerk of the Bureau of
          Engraving and Printing. All week the clerks have
          been buying small gifts suitable for children.
          Names of all the clerks who are “playing the game”
          will be placed in a hat this evening, and then
          drawings will be made for the presents. After the
          gifts have been drawn, and the joke at the expense
          of the recipients appreciated, all the toys will be
          turned over to some institution, and any left over
          will be sent to the home of the Santa Claus girl.
          This plan was conceived by and carried out under
          the direction of Miss Mary A. Carpenter.

          Over at Fort Myer Uncle Sam’s soldiers will
          decorate a Christmas tree in the gymnasium under
          the direction of wives of officers at the post,
          to be exhibited on Tuesday for the benefit of the
          children of the retired soldiers and those of men
          now on duty at the Philippines.

          Not only the poor, but those who are away from
          home, will have plenty of provision made for their
          Christmas cheer. At the Y. M. C. A. the usual
          visitation will be made to the rooms of all young
          men, and during the day there will be Christmas
          activities of various sorts by the clubs and
          departments of the association.

          The Young Women’s Christian Association has planned
          a day which, it hopes, will drive homesickness from
          the heart of any girl who is away from her home at
          this season. The building at 619 Fourteenth street
          will be open from 3 until 9 o’clock. A Christmas
          party will be in progress during that time. Games
          will be played, Christmas carols will be sung by
          the Y. W. C. A. Choral Club, and a tree will yield
          gifts for everyone. Refreshments will be served.

          In addition to the distribution of baskets to be
          made by the Salvation Army and the missions, Almas
          Temple, Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, is to give
          away 500 Christmas baskets, Central Union Mission
          will distribute between 400 and 500 baskets and
          Gospel Mission will send about 500. Boy Scouts have
          been enlisted in the work of distributing these
          gifts.

          The observance will spread to inmates of District
          institutions. At the workhouse at Occoquan men will
          be given a holiday and a special dinner, and they
          will attend a special Christmas service tomorrow
          afternoon. At the District jail a special dinner,
          which includes turkey, will be served.

          At the Petworth School playgrounds there will be
          a community Christmas tree celebration tonight at
          7 o’clock. A large tree will be decorated with
          lights, and school children will form a chorus
          to sing Christmas carols. This celebration will
          be under the auspices of the Petworth Citizens’
          Association.

          This afternoon there will be a Christmas
          entertainment at Washington Barracks, when Kris
          Kringle will appear with a bag laden with toys and
          good things for the children. The tree will be
          on the platform of the post exchange building. A
          musical program will be given by the post band.

          At the Central Presbyterian Church, where the
          President attends services, gift-bringing as well
          as gift-giving was a feature of the Christmas
          exercises. For that reason the services were held
          on Monday, and gifts brought at that time are being
          sent to the Lynchburg Orphanage, the Mountain
          School, at Grundy, Va., and the Red Cross war
          fund, to the city missions, and several charities
          of the city.

          At the Neighborhood House, Friendship House, and
          Noel House, there will be Christmas trees, and
          celebrations extending until New Year, with daily
          features, such as entertainments, plays, musicales,
          and other provisions for the children of those
          neighborhoods.

          Students from Washington who are attending colleges
          and schools away from Washington began to pour into
          the city to-day, and enlivened the crowds on F
          street. Washington schools and colleges have closed
          for the holidays. Many activities have been planned
          for the holidays by students at George Washington
          University. Teas, dances, suppers, banquets, and
          theater parties are among the functions planned
          by fraternities, student societies, and groups of
          students.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHRISTMAS IN CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL

          _Providence Journal_

          “Hey, you, I got more Christmas presents ’n you
          did. An’ I gotta pitcher taken thing with a snake
          in it. Wot’dju git?”

          “I gotta chu-chu, an’ a lotta other stuff and
          things. An’, an’, I gotta dawg.”

          This was the conversation, no, only a part of
          the dialogue, which passed between Little Jimmie
          Trupper and Mildred Conner at the Rhode Island
          Hospital yesterday afternoon, after Santa Claus had
          entered through the window and dispensed his good
          cheer from a tree which stood in the centre of the
          children’s ward.

          Jimmie has been in a form for months, being treated
          for spinal trouble. He could only move his hands,
          roll his head and laugh. But, oh, how he did laugh,
          and sing, too. And little Mildred, she was strapped
          to a board. Mildred has not advanced far enough to
          be taken off the board and put into a form; but
          she, too, could move her hands and roll her head
          and laugh and cuddle her “dawg” to her bosom.

          The ward contains 39 children at present, suffering
          from injuries and being treated for various
          ailments. Perhaps some of them will never have
          another Christmas. But if you had closed your eyes
          and heard them laughing and singing, you would
          never have thought you were in a hospital. Many of
          them were able to sit up, and so that they could
          all be in one room, two were put in some beds.
          Those who could sit up had little red wrappers over
          their nighties, and propped up around the sides of
          the room, they looked for all the world like little
          animated red holly berries.

          Santa was delayed. He told them he had gotten as
          far as the grounds, and then, having forgotten
          one present, had to drive 5000 miles back to his
          ice-covered palace. And then, when he returned,
          Jerry, one of his reindeers, had fallen into the
          pond in front of the hospital, and it had taken two
          hours to fish him out; honest, it did.

          But, oh, what a reception he received. Thirty-nine
          little bed-ridden tots singing “Jingle Bells” when
          he bounded in the window. Singing, did we say?
          Could they sing? You should have heard them. Angels
          never sang sweeter. They warbled and caroled, just
          as if they were as free as the birds, instead of
          being inmates of a hospital ward.

          And, my, what a tree! It touched the ceiling, and
          its boughs hung down with its heavy burdens. Only
          a Christmas tree can bear such products--and such
          trees as that one don’t grow everywhere and don’t
          bring such cheer. There were dolls and games,
          houses and boats, dogs and cats, stoves and balls,
          and bags and bags of candy. The tree was decorated
          with chains and strings of pop corn and Santas
          which had been made by the children themselves.

          The presents were given out first, and then came
          the candy and oranges. The bags of candy were torn
          open, almost greedily, and there was a general
          sticky munching.

          “Aren’t you afraid you will make yourself sick
          eating so much candy?” Richard Lynch was asked.

          “No, I ain’t,” he replied. “I never gits sick.”

          Richard has been in a form a long time now, and so,
          of course, he’s not sick. Alfred Morrisetti was
          in the next bed, and between crammings of sweet
          stuffs, they compared their much-valued presents.

          “Didja see my ball?” asked Richard, as he held up a
          rubber ball which he will hardly be able to get the
          full benefit of for a long, long time yet.

          “Yes, but it ain’t half as nice as my bug,” Alfred
          replied, holding up a wriggley creature which
          shivered and shook as it was waved about. “I’m
          goinna call it Hinny ’cause its all on hinges.”

          There was little Mary Hayes, another spinal case,
          who received a set of dishes and a broom and a dust
          pan and insisted she was going to play “keeping
          house.” Each present was better than the other, and
          there were many for each patient.

          Flitting from bed to bed, winding up toys and
          adjusting pillows was Miss Laura B. Anderson,
          the nurse in charge of the ward. Along with Miss
          Anderson was Miss Margaret Smith, the children’s
          teacher, who taught them the songs they sang, and
          makes herself much beloved by the young charges
          entrusted to her care.

          Many convalescent adult patients were present,
          having been helped in from other wards. They were
          all remembered, too, as well as the children, when
          the candy and fruits were passed out by Dr. H. D.
          Clough, who played the part of Santa Claus. Several
          trustees, a number of the house staff and visiting
          doctors, with their wives, were also present.

          Music was furnished by Miss Virginia Boyd
          Anderson’s Orchestra. Piano solos were rendered by
          Dr. N. B. Cole and instrumental duets by Drs. Cole
          and W. O. Rice. A vocal quartet was also made up of
          Drs. Cole, Rice, H. G. Calder and B. H. Buxton. In
          every part of the programme the children joined and
          clapped until one would have thought their little
          hands would be sore.

          Early this morning the nurses visited various
          parts of the hospital singing carols. The choir
          from Grace Church will sing at the hospital this
          afternoon and St. Stephen’s choir will be there
          Sunday afternoon. To-day the children will have
          another presentation, when they will be visited by
          their parents and friends.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHRISTMAS PANTOMIME

          _New York Times_

          Just as the strolling players of old England put up
          their booths in the public square, so the players
          of Stuart Walker’s Portmanteau Theatre arranged a
          stage for a pantomime last night in Madison Square.
          The play, it had been announced, would begin at 9
          o’clock, but many of the players were unable to get
          away from engagements at uptown theatres on time.
          Meanwhile the crowd grew.

          It was a long wait. The arc lights in the park had
          been turned off. The clouds, which were hanging so
          low that their soft masses could be seen flying
          past the light on the top of the Metropolitan
          tower, threatened to pour down a shower at any
          minute. All of the lights on the giant Christmas
          tree near by had been turned off, except the star,
          and the wind whistled and moaned in the tree as it
          tossed the waving green branches. Only a band which
          was concealed behind the stage kept any liveliness
          stirring.

          Finally, at 9:30, concealed lights on the stage lit
          up the blue scenery and the pantomime began. The
          name of the play was “The Seven Gifts, a Fantasy of
          Christmas Giving.” The principal characters were
          the Wanderer, the Majordomo, the Emerald Queen,
          Jack-in-the-Box, the Lowly Man, his Son, the Rich
          Man, the Haughty Lady, the Humble Woman, the Brave
          Man, the Strolling Player, Pierrot, the Moon Lady,
          and the Dear Child. Placards at the side of the
          theatre announced the action of the play so that
          all might understand.

          The trumpeters signaled for silence. The crowd of
          about 2,500, which stretched on all the paths as
          far as Fifth Avenue, became still. Chimes sounded
          as the Wanderer, an old man with a pack on his
          back, clad in garb of brown, blue and yellow, came
          from among the spectators. He saw the stage with
          its closely drawn curtains. What was it all for, he
          mutely questioned, and started to pull the curtains
          of the theatre within a theatre to investigate,
          but at that moment out stepped the prologuist and
          answered his question by telling mutely, “The
          theatre is for you, Wanderer, and for you and you
          and you,” to the audience, “and for all who come to
          share this fantasy.”

          Then the inner curtain slowly rose and disclosed
          the court of the Emerald Queen with her attendants.
          In the course of the play seven gifts were brought
          to her. The first was Jack-in-the-Box, which
          part was taken by Tom Powers, who danced for the
          Queen. Then the Lowly Man and his son brought in
          a scraggly little Christmas tree, which, however,
          being the best they had, was acceptable to the
          Queen. The Haughty Lady brought flowers, but would
          take no notice of the Lowly Man and his son.

          The Richest Man in the World brought to the Queen
          many treasures, but when a bubble blew across the
          stage and the Queen wished for it, neither he nor
          his attendants could capture it. Finally, when he
          managed to touch it, it burst.

          Then the Humble Woman came with her bird, but when
          a cage was brought for it she set it free, refusing
          to give it into captivity. The Haughty Lady was
          very much touched and became repentant of her proud
          action. The Bravest Man in the World then entered
          and had an amusing fight with Jack-in-the-Box, who
          simulated a tiger. Then came the strolling players
          with their play.

          Scenery was set up and a pretty story of Pierrot
          and the Moon Lady enacted.

          The Moon Lady first appeared as an old hag to whom
          Pierrot offered food. But she wanted kisses, for
          only by the kiss of one who had never kissed a fair
          lady could she regain her maidenly form. Pierrot
          was evidently the one to do the job, for as soon as
          he kissed her she became the beautiful Moon Lady
          once again and Pierrot fell madly in love with her.
          He chased her, but she eluded him, wafting her veil
          tantalizingly in his face. At last, when the sun
          rose, she was forced to leave him altogether, and
          Pierrot was quite broken up about it.

          The seventh gift was from the Dear Child, who
          presented her own doll, somewhat the worst for
          wear, to the Queen. But this gift came from the
          heart and was worth all the others. The Queen told
          her that she might take what she would of the many
          presents that had been brought. Looking at all the
          gifts her eye finally lighted on the bright star at
          the top of the great tree in the square. She said
          she wanted that, and as the Queen and courtiers
          followed her gesture the huge tree burst into
          light. The Queen dismissed the others and departed
          herself.

          Turning, the child saw that the room was empty, and
          there was her gift on the throne. She took the doll
          to look at each present, but the doll, too, refused
          them all. Then the child placed the doll on the
          Queen’s throne, to play at being Queen, while the
          lights on the stage grew dimmer and dimmer, as the
          fantasy ended.

          Many left because the narrow paths of the park were
          crowded, but had there been one wide-open space,
          ten times the number could have seen the play.

          *       *       *       *       *

          LAST DAY FOR STRAW HATS

          _Milwaukee Evening Wisconsin_

          Died, on August 31, 1909, at 60 minutes past 11,
          S. Traw Hatt, aged 92 days and some minutes, at
          his late place of abode at 41144 Cranium place.
          Deceased was a prominent figure in the downtown
          district, being usually accompanied by a band. His
          démise was not unexpected but was nevertheless a
          shock to many who were accustomed to take chances
          with the lake breezes until far into autumn. Hatt
          and Dame Fashion were closely allied during the
          summer silly season, but his departure from this
          existence apparently is not mourned by the fickle
          despot, who herself had foretold that September
          1 would see the last of Hatt. Hatt, despite his
          unmistakable masculinity, was frequently mistaken
          for the mysterious Miss Dolly Dimples of The
          Evening Wisconsin, and it was a common sight to
          see him madly pursued by a score of irate but
          prominent citizens in the vicinity of Grand avenue
          bridge on a windy day. It probably was because of
          Hatt’s close proximity to many classic brows that
          he was so popular in various Greek boot-black
          establishments, where the swarthy sons of Hellas
          spent ten minutes at a time in putting him through
          oxalic baths with the hope of insuring longevity
          and pristine luster. Hatt’s only near relatives
          are Miss Peach B. Asket and Mrs. Sue P. Bowle.
          Appropriate requiem services will be held at the
          board of trade today. Interment will be in the
          family attic or a handy ash barrel. Inscribed on
          the tomb will be the legend:

          “We loved our Straws but oh you Felts.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          BANQUET

          _New York World_

          In response to the toast, “The Land o’ Cakes,”
          Andrew Carnegie, speaking last night at the St.
          Andrew’s Society banquet, practically rolled all
          the cakes there are into one big doughnut, bit off
          the entire rim for Scotland, and left England,
          Ireland, America, Asia and Africa to divide the
          hole among themselves.

          Entirely surrounded by Scotch flags, Scotch music,
          Scotch whiskey and gentlemen in kilts, Mr. Carnegie
          looked the most pleased man in the world as he got
          up to speak. He had just led the singing of the
          “Star Spangled Banner,” and “God Save the King,”
          and remarked in his first paragraph that he hadn’t
          much voice left for his speech.

          But, with Scotland for a text, he managed to talk
          brawly for about twenty minutes, and by the time
          he was back in his seat Scotland had claimed
          everything in sight.

          “Scotland is a land of small population, but her
          sons, though few, are deep,” said the Ironmaster.
          Everybody laughed at that, but Mr. Carnegie held up
          a deprecating hand and said that he wasn’t trying
          to be funny, that he was seizing the occasion to
          make known just a little of what Scotchmen had done
          for the world.

          Whereupon he harked back to the fifth century, at
          which time he declared mankind began to look to the
          land o’ cakes for pattern and example.

          Running then somewhat rapidly down the centuries,
          he maintained that for all those years Scotland had
          been supreme in three branches above all others:
          religion, politics and education.

          Nobody on earth, for instance, ever had more
          religious liberty than Scotchmen have always had.
          The humblest cotter over there was as free to
          worship His Maker in his own way as was His Majesty
          the King. Mr. Carnegie had observed that much in
          Scotland in his boyhood and had been forcibly
          struck with it every time he had been back since.

          In America, to sum up on the count of religious
          liberty, there is as much liberty as in Scotland,
          but no more, and, anyway, America borrowed the idea
          from the free kirk.

          When he came down to political greatness, Mr.
          Carnegie gave his hearers a shock. The United
          States owed its Constitution to a Scotchman, Judge
          Wilson, and Mr. Carnegie proved it by quoting a
          letter which he said George Washington had written
          Wilson, saying “we owe the American Constitution to
          you.”

          Quickly slipping in Alexander Hamilton, making
          him as Scotch as possible and crediting him with
          everything that hadn’t been already cornered by
          Judge Wilson, Mr. Carnegie then got along to the
          matter of education, and showed that Scotland, as
          copied by America, led the world.

          Witness John Witherspoon, of the early days of
          Princeton, America’s model educator ever since. On
          account of him and for all the aforesaid reasons,
          said Mr. Carnegie, a Scotchman always feels
          at home in the United States; Scotland is his
          mother, America is his wife, and there is nothing
          inconsistent in his loving both.

          Besides Mr. Carnegie, the speakers of the evening
          were Hamilton Mabie, Gen. Leonard Wood, E. Theodore
          Martin, Irving Bacheller, Julius M. Mayer, Dr.
          Alexander McGregor and Harry Lauder. Lauder
          responded to the toast “Honest Men an’ Bonnie
          Lassies”; Gen. Wood, to the “Army and Navy.”

          A bagpipe band played alternately with a string
          orchestra, and a lot of the Scotsmen present came
          in kilts and bare legs. It was noticeable, though,
          that most of the latter wore long fur overcoats and
          went home in closed automobiles.

          In addition to Lauder, Messrs. John Reid, E.
          Theodore Mayer and George A. Fleming, all well
          known Scottish singers, enlivened the evening with
          ballads. A few of those present were:

          Robert Foulis, Frank W. McLaughlin, Rev. David G.
          Wylie, Alexander McGregor, of Boston; Lieut.-Col.
          Allan C. Bakewell, Dr. Neil MacPhatter, Rev.
          Anthony H. Evans, D. D., Evert Jansen Wendell,
          Gen. John T. Lockman, Edgar L. Marston, Rev.
          George Alexander, Robert C. Ogen, Courtenay Walter
          Bennett, British Consul-General at New York;
          J. Edward Simmons, president of the Chamber of
          Commerce, and Rear-Admiral Caspar F. Goodrich, U.
          S. N.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SCHOOL ENTERTAINMENT

          _New York Times_

          The crippled children of Public School 2, Primary,
          almost believed that they were the butterflies
          and bees and flowers that they impersonated in
          the playlet of “Cinderella in Flowerland” in
          the auditorium of Public School 62, at Hester
          and Essex Streets, yesterday afternoon, for the
          entertainment of the primary children of other
          schools in the neighborhood. And a happy woman was
          Mrs. Elizabeth Waldo Schuarz, Principal of Public
          School 2, Primary, who has taken the crippled
          children’s annex under her special supervision. As
          the children sang and haltingly danced on their
          unstable little legs she smiled and almost wept by
          turns.

          Other grown-ups in the audience, too, had recourse
          to handkerchiefs as children dressed as butterflies
          fluttered in, some with creaking braces on their
          legs, singing:

            Lightly, lightly winging, on the breezes swinging,
            Airy little fairies, full of grace and glee,
            Dancing with the sunbeams, weaving dainty day dreams,
            Could mortals be as light and free? Airy fairies we!

          It was the old story of Cinderella, but the
          characters were flowers, Sunshine, Bonnie Bee, the
          good old Godmother, and Mother Nature. Cinderella
          was a daisy bud, and because her petals had not yet
          unfolded she had no fine dress to wear to the ball
          of Prince Sunshine. Cinderella was Marie Schatter,
          who is well on the road to recovery from a bad
          case of curvature of the spine. The stepsisters,
          Hollyhock and Tiger Lily, were proud indeed,
          although they did limp a little.

          Mother Nature, the good fairy godmother, however,
          summoned Bonnie Bee, who, in his efforts to call
          the sunshine to open Cinderella’s petals, quite
          forgot that he had a tubercular knee. When the
          sunshine did come and Cinderella’s petals opened
          up, she smiled as only a little girl who has
          suffered much can smile.

          At the ball the part of the Prince was taken by
          Celia Weller, who has not lost hope that her back
          may some day be straight. Among the flowers was a
          little girl, all in white, who carried a bunch of
          blossoms almost as big as her stunted self.

          The play from the ball on followed the time-honored
          version. In the final scene, where the Prince finds
          his true love by the try-on of the tiny slipper,
          all the thirty children in the play came upon the
          stage.

          In spite of their physical handicaps, the children
          put great spirit into the play, much to the credit
          of the educational system that lifts little
          sufferers into Fairyland.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL ENTERTAINMENT

          _New York Mail_

          A sweet-faced woman stood beside the crib of little
          Jack MacIntyre in the surgical ward of St. Mary’s
          Free Hospital for Children this afternoon, and
          watched him hold court with the little queens of
          Fairyland, whom De Wolf Hopper had imported from
          the Majestic theatre. Above the crib was a copper
          plate bearing the inscription, “In Loving Memory
          of Katherine Harris Wilkes,” and it was between
          this plate and the happy group paying homage to
          little Jack that the woman divided her attention.
          Sometimes it seemed as if tears were responsible
          for the glistening in her eyes, but this impression
          died away when her gaze rested on the little man in
          the crib.

          He was a happy little fellow, and his smile was
          contagious. Even the staid little members of the
          “Pied Piper” chorus, exalted to the pinnacle of
          dignity by being permitted to take part in a
          “benefit performance,” melted before it. They had
          approached his crib shyly, but the effusiveness of
          his greeting was irresistible.

          “I was goin’ home to-day,” he gurgled, “but I’m
          goin’ to stay now for the show. I like shows, I
          do, and I like”--this with an arch smile--“I like
          girls, too.”

          “You little dear,” said Miss Marguerite Clarke, who
          plays the part of Elvira in the Hopper show. Jack
          accepted this tribute complacently, for when one is
          four years old and the pet of an entire hospital
          staff, homage becomes almost commonplace.

          “Which of these little girls do you like best?”
          queried the smiling nurse, who was chaperoning
          Jack’s guests. Now Jack’s last name is MacIntyre,
          and he proved right then and there that he was a
          bona fide “Mac,” blarney and all.

          “I like,” he said, and his eyes roved smilingly
          over the entire party, “I like ’em all.”

          This diplomatic answer won so much commendation
          from the little girl guests that it is probable
          that Jack would still be holding court if the
          performance planned to gladden both him and his
          little comrades had not been scheduled to start at
          1 o’clock sharp. Chirps of impatience from other
          parts of the ward warned the party that their visit
          must be cut short; so the little fairy queens
          left Jack and prepared for their entrance on the
          miniature stage which had been erected in the
          middle of the big room. Only the sweet-faced woman
          who had stood silently beside the crib remained,
          and Jack turned his beaming face upon her.

          “Are you happy, dear?” she said.

          “Sure,” he chuckled; “there’s goin’ to be a show.
          Ain’t you never seen a show?”

          The woman turned from him a second and looked up at
          the inscription on the plate above his crib. Then
          she looked down at his smiling face again and said:

          “It’s been a long time since I have seen one,
          dear, but I’m going to watch the show here to-day
          with you. May I?”

          “Sure,” he said. And then he stretched his tiny arm
          through the bars of the crib and laid his moist
          little hand in hers--“You and me, together.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          LAWN FETE

          _Kansas City Times_

          A quaint old fashioned garden, gay with rose
          trees and wistaria-twined archways, a garden
          which blossomed in a day, was the setting for
          the delightfully costumed fete given yesterday
          afternoon for the benefit of the little sufferers
          of Mercy Hospital. Girls in primitive Yorkshire
          peasant garden smocks assisted in the welcoming of
          those who came to see the pageant and to give their
          mite for charity. Little ones of every age who
          followed the “pied piper” were reproductions of the
          children of Kate Greenaway. Flowered chintzes gave
          aid to the blossoms in the garden in adding to the
          color effect.

          It was a fete for the delight of all the grownups,
          but it really belonged to the little Miss Muffets
          and their brothers and sisters. This little bit
          of a Mother Goose child was there in the person
          of Mary Belden, who looked so bewitching in her
          flowered ankle-long frock demurely laced in front
          with velvet ribbon, her fascinating mob cap and
          strapped white slippers that even then she might
          have been in a terrible fright of the wicked spider
          had it not been for the wonderful mitts she wore.
          They were quaint and black, and Miss Muffet’s pride
          in them apparently gave chase to her timidity.

          Riding a pony with all his might was little J. W.
          McGarvey. A pale blue long-tailed coat had he, and
          a stunning high hat sat proudly and securely on his
          head.

          Betty Banks wore a long yellow postilion coat over
          her pretty white frock and also a big black riding
          hat.

          Far from contrary and altogether fascinating were
          the “pretty maids all in a row,” and even the
          original contrary Mary might have been forgiven for
          her contrariness had she appeared in the frock
          this Mary (Miss Virginia Aikins) wore. Her costume
          was a checkered one in many hues, banded about the
          bottom with velvet ribands. Her big, big hat in
          Leghorn and her extensive lace collar gave her a
          very important air.

          The pretty maids were decked in flowered frocks
          of gayest chintzes, bobbing poke bonnets and Maud
          Muller hats. Ribbon streamers mingled with their
          curls and gave to the costumes a graceful touch.

          The two little Pussy Cats were attractive little
          kittens in posied skirts and black coats.

          Almost too heavy for little Jacky Horner was the
          big Christmas pie. But the broadly checked long
          trousers and the checked “runabout” composed a very
          stunning suit.

          Too pretty to tumble in were the costumes of Jack
          and Jill, Virginia and Penelope Smith. Jack’s suit
          of sprigged chintz and Jill’s plaid swirling skirts
          were topped by a high hat and a bright bonnet with
          plaid bands. With his faithful crook, a gay yellow
          suit and a cocked hat Little Bo Peep took his way
          after his sheep very energetically.

          “The Merchantmen” were costumed in velvet doublets
          and hose. These were in bright blue and rose and
          green and purple. Their velvet Beef-eater hats were
          true to the type and very becoming to the wearers.

          Outside the garden the grounds were turned into
          Arcady where booths were created into miniature
          kingdoms, the prettiest of the young matrons
          and girls presiding. Miss Felice Lyne and her
          assistants, Mrs. William Perry, Miss Virginia
          George, Miss Dorothy George, Miss Helen Furguson,
          Miss Katherine Harvey and Mrs. C. N. Seidlitz, jr.,
          were at the refreshment booth. Miss Lyne sold the
          cigarettes there.

          Miss Josephine Bird, Miss Elizabeth Marsh and Miss
          Ada Lee Porter served at another booth near.

          All these young women wore the picturesque
          garden smock and some type of hat which properly
          accompanied it.

          Pretty peddlers everywhere were dressed in airy
          summer frocks with skirts of great expanse,
          ruffle trimmed and suggestive in every way of
          the picturesque Victorian era. They were selling
          sweets and flowers and balloons. To the lot of Mrs.
          Kenneth Dickey fell the task of disposing of the
          balloons. Mrs. Dickey wore a white net gown trimmed
          in velvet bands and a large hat with transparent
          brim. A silk sport coat added a bit of color.
          Among the other venders who plied their trade for
          charity’s sake were:

            Miss Annette McGee,
            Miss Virginia Beeler,
            Miss Elizabeth Dodge,
            Miss Catherine Firey,
            Miss Madeline Dickey,
            Miss Gwendolyn Green,
            Miss Flora Markey,
            Miss Dorothy Johnston,
            Miss Florence Haight,
            Mrs. List Peppard,
            Miss Helen Foran,
            Miss Ada Lee Porter,
            Miss Josephine Bird,
            Miss Elizabeth Marsh,
            Miss Elizabeth Cook,
            Miss Helen Mace.

          *       *       *       *       *

          JUBILEE SERVICE IN CATHEDRAL

          _New York Evening Post_

          It is seldom that New York goes to church in honor
          of a foreign potentate, and a royal monarch at
          that. Yet some thousands filled St. Patrick’s
          Cathedral to-day to listen to a solemn high mass,
          celebrated with all the stately pomp of the Roman
          Catholic ritual, in honor of the diamond jubilee of
          his “Apostolic Majesty Francis Joseph I, Emperor
          of Austria and King of Hungary, of Bohemia, of
          Dalmatia, of Croatia, of Slavonia, of Galicia, of
          Jerusalem, Archduke of Austria, Count-Prince of
          Hapsburg, Seigneur of the Wendish March, Grand
          Voyvode of Servia,” and any number of additional
          titles.

          Archbishop Farley sat in his high seat at the left
          of the chancel, surrounded by monsignori in violet,
          while the glimmer of many-hued cassocks, the
          rustling of stoles, and the shimmer of the purple
          gowns of the acolytes filled the broad altar with a
          constant play of shifting colors.

          Through windows, high up, the cold early-winter
          sunshine poured, warmed by the gracious tones of
          the panes, and mingled with the yellow light of the
          candles on the high altar. At intervals along the
          nave and in the side aisles bunches of electric
          lights twinkled dimly.

          The church filled rapidly, and by the time the
          first premonitory rumbles of the organ started
          the echoes flying back and forth among the lofty
          arches, the front part, clear across the transept,
          was full, and scarce a pew throughout the entire
          body of the edifice that did not have its quota of
          the devout.

          Not all were Austrians or Hungarians, or any one
          of the myriad nationalities ruled over by the aged
          Emperor-King; not all were Catholics, either. Many
          were there simply to do honor to a man who had
          ruled the most scattered country in the world for
          sixty years, the span of an ordinary man’s life.

          In the front pews sat the diplomats and guests of
          honor, with here and there among them the glitter
          of a uniform or a decoration. An Austrian in the
          full uniform of his country’s service, his glazed,
          yellow-plumed shako on his arm and sword clanking
          at his heels, strode up the centre aisle to a pew.
          His stiff pompadour and little moustache reminded
          one of the slim lieutenants who haunt the cafés of
          Vienna and Buda-Pest. While one felt instinctively
          that he would have been out of place on Fifth
          Avenue, somehow his strange uniform fitted in with
          the atmosphere of the church.

          The organ started and the procession of altar boys,
          acolytes, priests, and deacons appeared. Candles
          glimmered, rose and fell, to the organ’s swelling
          prelude. With the clergy ranged in orderly rows
          before the altar, the chant of the Te Deum was
          taken up by the archbishop. Then the celebrant of
          the mass, the Rev. John Hauptmann, and his deacons,
          the Rev. Urban Nageleisen, and the Rev. Rudolph
          Nickel, clad in shimmering gold vestments, advanced
          and commenced the preliminary ceremonies of the
          mass.

          It was all very beautiful and imposing, and the
          vast congregation sat spellbound through the scene,
          while the clergy, the celebrants, and the masters
          of the ceremonies, the Rev. J. V. Lewis and the
          Rev. A. Blaznick, conducted the rites.

          Later, there were sermons by the Rev. Ambrose
          Schumack and Father Mateus. Father Schumack spoke
          in English with a marked German accent, taking for
          his text “Fear God, honor the King.” He told of
          the work of Francis Joseph, of his long and stormy
          reign.

          “On this glorious day,” he said, “it would hardly
          be fitting to go into the sadnesses of his life.
          We may pass over the wars, bloody and terrible,
          into which he was dragged; we may pass over the
          tragedies in his family history. He is an old man,
          who has ruled his country for sixty years, and
          who has kept her, until to-day, whole and strong.
          He has kept her so, largely, I think, because
          of the aid which he has been afforded by Divine
          Providence. ‘Fear God; honor the King.’ That is a
          motto which can hurt none of us.”

          One could not avoid a quiver of historic interest
          at the words. Perhaps never, since the days when
          Clinton’s grenadiers garrisoned New York, has a
          clergyman preached from such a text.

          Father Mateus, who followed Father Schumack, spoke
          in the Magyar tongue. Many there were in the
          audience who leaned forward attentively in their
          seats, drinking in the unwonted words. To them it
          was like a breath fresh from the fatherland. But
          the majority of the audience could only appreciate
          the priest’s fine delivery, which sent his resonant
          words clanging distinctly into every farthest
          corner of the building.

          At last, Father Mateus climbed down from the
          pulpit, and the service was continued. And
          then, when it was nearly time to go, the whole
          congregation rose and joined with the choir and the
          priests in singing the mighty “Volkshymne,” which
          runs:

            Gott erhalte, Gott beschütze
              Unsern Kaiser, unser Land!
            Maechtig durch des Glaubens Stuetze,
              Führ’ er uns mit weiser Hand!

            Lass uns seiner Vaeter Krone
              Schirmen wider jeden Feind;
            Innig bleibt mit Habsburg’s Throne
              Oesterreichs Geschick vereint.

          Besides Mayor McClellan and his secretary, others
          who attended were Patrick McGowan, president of the
          Board of Aldermen; Lawrence Grosser, president of
          the Borough of Queens; Louis H. Haffen, president
          of the Borough of the Bronx; Bird S. Coler,
          president of the Borough of Brooklyn; Thomas F.
          Murphy, assistant postmaster; Robert Watchorn,
          immigration commissioner; Samuel S. Koenig,
          secretary of State-elect; Rear-Admiral Goodrich;
          Gustave Lindenthal, Judge Hough of the United
          States District Court, and the justices of the
          Supreme Court, Charles H. Truax, Henry Bischoff,
          jr., Leonard A. Giegerich, John W. Goff, Mitchell
          E. Erlanger, Lorenz Zeller, and W. H. Olmstead. The
          city magistrates were represented by Henry Steinert
          and Peter T. Barlow.

          Practically all the diplomatic representatives
          of the various governments maintaining consular
          offices in this city were present, including the
          Austrian consul-general, Baron Otto Hoenning
          O’Carroll; the Austrian consul, Georg von
          Grivicic; Karl Buenz, the German consul-general;
          Leg. Rat Karl Gneist, German consul; the Count
          Hannibal Massiglia, Italian consul-general;
          Courtenay W. Bishop, English consul; Étienne
          Lanel, French consul; Baron A. Schlippenbach,
          Russian consul-general; Kokichi Midzune, Japanese
          consul-general; John R. Planten, consul-general of
          the Netherlands; Julius Clan, consul-general of
          Denmark; Jose Joaquim Gomes dos Santos, Brazilian
          consul-general; Jose V. Fernandez, consul-general
          of Argentina; Ricardo Sanchez-Croz, consul-general
          of Chili; Wallace White, consul-general of
          Paraguay; Juon J. Ulloa, consul-general of Costa
          Rica, and Ramon Bengoeches, consul-general of
          Guatemala.

          The officers of the Austrian Society of New York,
          Emil Fischel, Dr. Edward Pisko, Dr. Karl Weiss, and
          Leopold Selzer, together with many of the members,
          were likewise present.

          *       *       *       *       *

          UNIVERSITY COMMENCEMENT

          _New York Evening Post_

          NEW HAVEN, Conn., June 17.--Seven hundred and
          seventy-eight degrees were conferred upon students
          of the class of 1914 at the 213th commencement
          exercises of Yale University here to-day. The
          ceremonies were held in Woolsey Hall, in the
          presence of a great and distinguished academic
          gathering. Twenty-one honorary degrees were
          conferred, among them that of doctor of laws on
          Romulo S. Naon, Ambassador from the Argentine to
          the United States, and now one of the envoys in the
          mediation proceedings at Niagara Falls.

          The same honor was awarded to Surgeon-Gen. William
          Crawford Gorgas, who yesterday received the degree
          of doctor of science from Princeton. In view of the
          centennial celebration of the Yale Medical School,
          it was natural that the number of medical men to
          receive honorary degrees should be much greater
          than usual.

          The gathering of the candidates for degrees was
          preceded by the customary procession, formed in
          Vanderbilt Court, through the central green and
          thence through College Street to Woolsey Hall,
          while the Trinity Church chimes on the Green
          and the band which headed the procession played
          “Onward, Christian Soldiers.” The formal exercises
          included music conducted by Prof. Horatio Parker,
          dean of the Music School. Three of the numbers
          were composed by Jean Sibelius, who was among
          the recipients of honorary degrees. Prayer was
          offered by the Rev. Dr. Charles E. Jefferson, of
          New York City, a member of the Yale Corporation.
          Prof. Wilbur L. Cross, of the Scientific School,
          presented the candidates for honorary degrees.

          For work done in the various departments of the
          University the 778 degrees were conferred as
          follows: In Yale College, 287 bachelors of arts,
          313 bachelors of philosophy; in the School of
          Divinity, 27 bachelors of divinity; in the School
          of Law, 29 bachelors of laws, 6 masters of laws,
          2 doctors of laws, 2 bachelors of civil laws; in
          the School of Forestry, 24 masters of forestry; in
          the Graduate School, 32 doctors of philosophy and
          30 masters of arts; in the Sheffield Scientific
          School, 1 degree of electrical engineer, 2 of civil
          engineer, 8 of mechanical engineer, 4 of engineer
          of mines; in the School of Fine Arts, 1 bachelor
          of fine arts and 2 bachelors of music. The prizes
          in all departments were announced yesterday, and
          the chief honors were published in the _Evening
          Post_.

          Of the men receiving honorary degrees, the
          following were awarded the degree of Master of Arts:

            Edwin Howland Blashfield, mural decorator, winner
            of many prizes, and editor of Vasari’s “Lives of
            the Painters.”

            Edward Robinson Baldwin, M.D., right-hand man
            of Dr. Trudeau at Saranac Lake, and an American
            authority on tuberculosis.

            William Herbert Corbin, ’89, honored because
            of his important work as Connecticut Tax
            Commissioner.

            Capt. Charles Franklin Craig, M.D., ’94, an
            officer of the United States Medical Corps, who
            has distinguished himself chiefly by work on
            malarial and tropical diseases.

            John Howland, ’94, professor of pediatrics at
            Johns Hopkins University.

            James Hartness, president of the American Society
            of Mechanical Engineers, inventor of useful
            mechanical parts, instruments, etc.

            Henry Hun, Ph.B., ’74, well-known neurologist and
            formerly president of the Association of American
            Physicians.

            Elliott Proctor Joslin, ’90, a physician of note
            in Boston, who is connected with the Harvard
            Medical School.

            Fred Towsley Murphy, ’97, professor of surgery in
            Washington University, St. Louis.

            Oliver C. Smith, president of the Connecticut
            Medical Society, and a leading surgeon of
            Hartford.

            William Francis Verdi, M.D., ’94, a leading
            operative surgeon of Connecticut.

            Miss Mary Emma Woolley, president of Mount
            Holyoke College.

          Jean Sibelius, the leading Finnish composer, was
          honored with the degree of doctor of music. The
          degree of doctor of science was conferred upon
          Edgar Fahs Smith, provost of the University of
          Pennsylvania and a well-known American chemist, and
          upon Richard Pearson Strong, Ph.B., ’93, professor
          in the Harvard Medical School, an authority on
          tropical diseases.

          Sidney Gulick, professor of theology at Doshisha,
          author of “The Social Evolution of the Japanese,”
          and influential adviser of the Japanese and
          American Governments on matters of race adjustment
          on the shores of the Pacific, received the honorary
          degree of doctor of divinity.

          The following received the degree of doctor of laws:

          William Crawford Gorgas, surgeon-general of
          the United States, chief sanitary engineer of
          the Panama Canal, and a member of the Isthmian
          Commission.

          George Wharton Pepper, an eminent lawyer and a
          citizen vitally interested in the work of Christian
          unity and missions.

          Rómulo S. Naón, Ambassador of Argentina to the
          United States, formerly Minister of Education, and
          a jurist of note.

          John Kimberly Beach, 77, formerly of the firm
          which for many years has been the counsel of the
          University, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court
          of Connecticut, and professor of mercantile law and
          admiralty jurisprudence in the Yale Law School.

          Peter Ainslee, leader in the Church of the
          Disciples, worker in the cause of Christian unity,
          and the author of the standard history of his
          communion.

          A commencement week made historical by the
          endowment and promise of further endowment in its
          centennial year of the Yale Medical School, was
          brought to a close by the exercises to-day. In
          every way, this week marking the completion of the
          213th year of the conferring of Yale degrees is
          generally regarded as a notable one. On the class
          reunion side, the usual bizarre effects have been
          gained by the adoption of class costumes. Various
          classes appeared as polo players, Colonials,
          British soldiers, and Chinese mandarins, and some
          two hundred members of the academic triennial class
          were decked out as playing-cards. Many classes
          report record attendances, those back for regular
          reunions including numerous distinguished sons of
          the University. One gathers the impression that
          this year’s commencement has brought back greater
          numbers than any previous occasion, barring, of
          course, the bicentennial celebration, in the fall
          of 1901.

          Two innovations were tried out this year on the
          social side of commencement week. The so-called
          “1492 Dinner,” inaugurated some years ago to
          provide a Tuesday evening dinner for all returning
          graduates not included in regular reunion classes,
          was taken over by the class secretaries’ bureau
          and rejuvenated under the more formal title of
          the “United Graduates’ Reunion Dinner.” Held in
          Woolsey Hall, where the Newberry organ was used to
          accompany the singing of old Latin hymns, and where
          the surroundings were conducive to a more informal
          and intimate gathering than in the University
          Dining Hall, the dinner was a success under the
          new auspices. Charles W. Littlefield, ’03, of New
          York, presided, and two of the speakers were John
          H. Finley, Commissioner of Education of New York,
          and Dudley Field Malone. At the end of the Tuesday
          evening reunion celebration, a general alumni
          gathering on the College campus brought men of all
          classes together. This meeting was an improvement
          on last year’s gathering, spectacular fireworks,
          general singing, and athletic contests being the
          features of the programme.

          The final event of the Yale commencement of 1914
          was the president’s reception in Memorial Hall this
          afternoon.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The following two stories show how the same
          incident was reported in a Chicago morning paper
          and in a New York evening paper of the same day._

          COMMENCEMENT INCIDENT

          (1)

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Champaign, Ill., June 17.--[Special.]--Discipline
          at the University of Illinois is not what it used
          to be in the days when they decided to make an
          example of Porter Gray, the boy who wouldn’t go to
          chapel.

          Chapel cutting in those times was considered a
          pretty serious offense; yet here was the Gray boy
          back on the campus today with the full knowledge
          and consent of the faculty.

          And more than that, the faculty--regardless of the
          fact that it wasn’t much more than twenty-nine
          years ago that he was suspended--patted him on the
          back, defied the rules of dignity by joining the
          student body in an oskey wow, wow, and wound up by
          making him a bachelor of science.

          Those of the town folk who saw Porter the day he
          packed up his other shirt and collar and marched
          defiantly into exile remarked on his changed
          appearance on his return. The hair that fringes the
          new bald spot on top of his head is gray, he has
          become exaggeratedly round shouldered, and he can’t
          see without the aid of thick lensed glasses. But
          that, says Champaign, is what fast city life will
          do to any youngster.

          Porter had not been back at school long before he
          met another bad boy--a chap named Harrison Coates
          Earl, who got into trouble with the university
          authorities and left as hastily as his classmate,
          Gray. Harrison has changed a lot, too. He has
          put on flesh, and he says that even without the
          recommendation of his alma mater he got a good
          position in Chicago as a municipal judge.

          The new school educators in charge at the
          university treated Harrison Earl as they did the
          Gray boy--only it was a bachelor of literature they
          made him.

          The two disciplined classmates had been wandering
          around the campus unrecognized amid a swarm of
          hurrying, nervous seniors. They met at the bursar’s
          office.

          “Here’s $5--my diploma fee. I’m Gray, ’85,” jerked
          Porter through the wicket, when a hand thumped
          against his back.

          “Gray, ’85, eh; little Port Gray? Why, you’re
          suspended for cutting chapel. You’d better get off
          the campus before they catch you.”

          Gray, ’85, whirled around. He recognized the heavy
          handed speaker.

          “Harrison Earl,” he cried. “Do you mean to say
          they’re taking you back, too?”

          “Not Harrison, but Judge Earl, if you please,” said
          the other severely. “Your guess is right. They’ve
          called me back to get my degree. In a few hours
          I’ll be a bachelor of literature. I don’t know,
          though, that it’s going to help me any in the law,
          but I’ll be glad to get it just the same. How about
          you?”

          Gray shook his head.

          “I’ll be a bachelor of science when they
          get through with me at the exercises,” he
          answered. “The degree might have done me some
          good--twenty-nine years ago--but I don’t think
          it’ll be of any great assistance to me now. It
          might make me eligible to the University club.
          But they probably wouldn’t want me there. I’m a
          professional masseur.”

          Back in the early ’80’s seniors at the state
          university didn’t go in for caps and gowns at
          commencement, but it never did take Porter Gray
          long to pick anything up. After looking over the
          new fangled outfits on display along the campus, he
          went into a shop and rented one for himself.

          In cap and gown he paraded into the university
          auditorium with the rest of the candidates for
          degrees. In the section to which he was ushered
          he found a dozen familiar faces, all seamed with
          wrinkles like his own, and most of them adorned
          with spectacles. The owners of the faces remembered
          him, too, as he was whispering greetings.

          “Will Brown--you still alive? Bob Dunlevy--why,
          Bob, you need a shave. Joe Holt, did you come all
          the way from California for this?”

          To those of his old schoolmates who hadn’t read
          of the university’s intention of calling it quits
          and conferring on him the degree held back for
          twenty-nine years, Gray explained the reason for
          his return.

          Gray told how, after losing his battle for
          reinstatement in the courts, he had decided to
          cut himself off forever from the university; how
          the alma mater had forgotten his existence, and
          then, with the unearthing of some old records, had
          “discovered” him and offered him a degree.

          “If they had not said the first word I never would
          have taken it,” Gray protested. “If I had it to do
          all over again I would not change my course. I was
          an agnostic, and I am one still. They couldn’t drag
          me to chapel if I thought I could put the time to
          better use with my books.”

          (2)

          _New York Evening Post_

          CHAMPAIGN, Ill., June 17.--Suspended twenty-nine
          years ago because he was an agnostic and would not
          attend chapel, Porter Gray, of the class of ’85,
          received his degree of bachelor of science from the
          University of Illinois to-day.

          Gray was working his way through the University
          back in the eighties. It was his ambition to become
          a Government entomologist. He was forced to take
          leave of absence for one year to earn money to
          complete his course.

          In spite of his narrow means and close attention
          to his studies, Gray began to acquire a campus
          reputation as the man who never went to chapel.
          Attendance was compulsory in those days. Selim H.
          Peabody, then president of the University, called
          Gray on the carpet, but the student was firm.

          “I am an agnostic,” he said. “I will not go to
          chapel.”

          “Write a statement that chapel attendance is
          repugnant to your religious convictions, and that
          will suffice,” said Dr. Peabody.

          “I will not. I have no religious convictions; I am
          an agnostic. I simply will not attend chapel,” said
          Gray.

          He was suspended forty days before he was to have
          been graduated.

          President Edmund J. James, of the University, came
          upon the papers in Gray’s old and forgotten case a
          short time ago when he was engaged in rounding up
          the old alumni for a home coming. He wrote to Gray
          in Chicago, and urged him to visit the University.

          Gray, embittered by a vain fight that had taken
          his last dollar years ago and had ended only in
          the State Supreme Court, to compel the University
          to give him his degree, replied curtly that all
          he wished the University to do was to forget him.
          President James wrote again that chapel rules were
          obsolete now, and that they wanted to give Gray his
          belated degree. Gray came here to-day, and from a
          big crowd of undergraduates he will hear for the
          first time the cheer of Illinois. College yells
          were not much known in Gray’s day here.

          *       *       *       *       *

          UNIVERSITY CLASS DAY

          _New York Sun_

          The Columbia seniors had an honorary valedictorian
          at their class day exercises yesterday afternoon
          whose name was not on the programme but whose
          presence on the platform called for ten minutes’
          continual cheering. Fifty years after he had been
          graduated, and upon the eve of his retirement
          from the university, Dean John Howard Van Amringe
          became an honorary member of the class of 1910, and
          yesterday, when the class was celebrating its last
          reunion as undergraduates, Van Amringe, ’60, made a
          farewell address to the class.

          When the class marched out of the gymnasium at
          the conclusion, the white haired dean and the
          senior president went out side by side, on the
          “pilgrimage” to Hamilton Hall, where the class ivy
          was planted.

          The exercises were held early in the afternoon in a
          room thronged with the relatives and friends of the
          graduates, who marched into the gymnasium dressed
          in academic cap and gown. Robert Scarborough
          Erskine delivered the president’s address of
          welcome. Francis N. Bangs, a son of Francis S.
          Bangs, who had much to do with the abolition of
          football at Columbia five years ago, was the class
          historian, and he divulged class secrets. He made
          the statement that a ballot of the class showed
          that forty-one of the eighty-seven members have
          more than a passing liking for beverages stronger
          than water, while fifty-two delight in using
          tobacco. Bangs did not go any further into the
          intimate history of the class.

          Harry Wilson of Sioux Falls, S. D., was selected
          the most popular man in the class, the one who
          has done most for Columbia, the most likely to
          succeed, likewise the noisiest, and the biggest
          politician. Howard Delane was chosen the best all
          around man and the best natured; he was elected
          the recipient of the alumni association prize to
          the most faithful and deserving student, which is
          the highest honor a senior at Columbia can gain.
          John Mentil was elected the best athlete; that
          distinction he gained with ease because he has been
          captain of a championship basketball team and is on
          the varsity baseball team. Clarence Renton won the
          rather doubtful honor of being the biggest fusser
          and likewise the most foolish man in the class.
          Sidney Glide took first place in the race for most
          conceited and grouchiest while Arthur Schuarz was
          designated the laziest, biggest sport and biggest
          bluffer.

          The statistics of the class as a whole showed that
          the average height was 5 feet 10½ inches, the
          average weight 151 pounds and the average age 21
          years 5 months, making the 1910 men the youngest
          set that has been graduated from Columbia in some
          time. Most of the members of the class were born
          and live in New York, although every part of the
          country is represented. Thirty-one men intend to
          study law, ten will take up engineering, nine have
          chosen medicine and eight will go into business.
          The others were hazy as to just what they were
          going to do, or were too modest to tell about their
          plans. More than half the class is Republican, and
          there are only ten Democrats. One man declared
          himself a “Bryan Republican.”

          The class decided that Prof. Hervey was the best
          teacher and the hardest professor to bluff. Prof.
          Charles Arthur Beard was elected the most popular
          professor, and William Clinton Densmore Odell, a
          brother of the ex-Governor and a professor in the
          English department, was elected the most polished.
          The history department was considered the best
          in the university, while the French department
          increased its lead in the contest for the least
          desirable, getting the fifteenth successive annual
          vote for that honor.

          Benjamin Berinstein, one of the two blind men in
          the class, was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, with
          Thomas Alexander, Paul Williams Aschner, Ernst
          Phillip Boas, Mortimer Brenner, Louis Grossbaum,
          John Dotha Jones, Russell Thorp Kirby, Herman
          Joseph Muller, William de Forest Pearson, Edward
          Heyman Pfeiffer, Maurice Picard and Rollo Linsmore
          de Wilton.

          Berinstein stood at the head of the list. He has
          studied for the last year in the law school, having
          completed the first three years of his course
          in the college last June. James Henry Mullin,
          the other blind member of the class, received
          commendation for his work.

          Condict W. Cutler read the class poem, and the
          class prophecy was delivered by C. Homer Ramsdell
          of Newburgh, N. Y. Geddes Smith of Paterson, N. J.,
          made the ivy oration, after William Langer and Dean
          Van Amringe had delivered their valedictories.

          William Allen White will deliver the annual Phi
          Beta Kappa address in Earl Hall this afternoon, on
          “A Theory of Spiritual Progress.” In the morning
          the seniors and the faculty will play the annual
          baseball game on South Field.




CHAPTER IX

ILLNESS AND DEATH


In this class of news stories are included those concerning the illness
or death of persons known in the community or in the world at large,
as well as those dealing with illness, surgical operations, and deaths
that are sufficiently unusual to be matters of general interest.
Stories of this kind are primarily informative in character, but the
importance of the personal element permits effective human interest
development. Pathetic phases of illness or death sometimes give value
to news that otherwise would be of slight interest. The seriousness of
the subject demands dignity of treatment.

In writing an obituary the purpose should be not only to give
biographical facts but to bring out the significance of a personality.
A well written obituary is a constructive interpretation of the meaning
of a person’s life and work.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ILLNESS

          _Kansas City Star_

          NEW YORK, Nov. 23.--Ye Olde Caxton Book
          Shop, Brooklyn, was closed long after 7 o’clock
          yesterday morning. Nobody stirred behind the brown
          paper curtains which hung on a coarse string over
          an improvised cross wall of musty old volumes,
          their titles long ago hidden beneath a layer of
          dust.

          Solicitous neighbors, tradesmen of the block,
          children on their way to school peered eagerly, but
          vainly, through the rain-streaked window, beyond
          careless rows of less ancient authors and orderless
          festoons of classical sheet music. Mere solicitude
          increased to anxiety, and anxiety to fear that an
          old man, loved by the neighborhood, had died among
          his treasures.

          Some one told the police and two men came to
          force the door, with an ambulance surgeon from
          the Bushwick Hospital, ready to give him aid if
          needed. Richard Wright was not dead, but how much
          longer he would have lasted if help had not come is
          uncertain. He lay there on a rude couch, home made
          and stretched across cases of books in the back of
          his store. Hunger, added to the natural weakness
          and feebleness of his 78 years, had almost claimed
          him for its victim.

          “No, no,” he feebly said. “Don’t take me to the
          hospital; I’m too old. I don’t want to cause
          trouble to anyone. I want to die quietly among my
          books.”

          Nailed against one of the bookcases was a small
          notice on black tin, “We refer all needy cases to
          the Brooklyn Charity Bureau.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          INDIAN DYING

          _Milwaukee Free Press_

          Tse-Ne-Gat is very weary.

          Soon he must go on the long, long journey,
          following the shadowy trail of all his people.

          For the white man’s plague has laid its ruthless
          hand upon him, and the white man’s plague has done
          what the white man’s rifles and the white man’s
          courts could never do. It has broken the spirit of
          Tse-Ne-Gat, and the heart of sorrowful old Ma Old
          Polk.

          It was while he waited for the white man’s court to
          sit, that the plague came to Tse-Ne-Gat. Justice
          the white man gave him, but with justice came the
          plague. This is the story of it:

          Tse-Ne-Gat, so the government said, murdered Juan
          Chacon, Mexican sheep-herder, and for the slaying
          Tse-Ne-Gat must be hanged. Cowboys and ranchers
          rode into the hills to take him, and Tse-Ne-Gat,
          his father and a few followers fought them off.
          They had sworn that they would not yield to all the
          armed forces of the United States, for they knew
          Tse-Ne-Gat had not killed the sheep-herder, and the
          Ute should not die a shameful death unjustly.

          Then Gen. Hugh Scott, U. S. A., rode into the hills
          alone. He promised that the Indian should have
          justice, and Tse-Ne-Gat was content. Out of the
          hills he rode with Scott, out of the hills and into
          the white man’s jail. There he waited until the
          white man’s court should sit to grant him justice.

          In the jail were other prisoners, and the great
          white plague stalked silently among them.
          Tse-Ne-Gat, pining for the hills and the arroyos
          and the great open spaces of the Ute reservation,
          was a shining mark for its unseen fatal arrows. So
          Tse-Ne-Gat began to cough the cough that all men,
          white or red, fear most of all, for it has not even
          the swift mercy of the rifle bullet.

          Attorney W. J. Kershaw, when the call for his
          help came from Colorado, left his office in the
          Germania building[C] to appear as counsel for
          Tse-Ne-Gat, and before the court of United States
          Judge Robert E. Lewis, in Denver, he acquitted him.
          And Tse-Ne-Gat was free to go back again to the
          reservation. Only, the order of the court could not
          free him from the white man’s plague, which the
          white man’s jail had given him.

          [C] Milwaukee.

          So Tse-Ne-Gat and old Ma Old Polk went to a
          hospital, near Denver. Tse-Ne-Gat made for himself
          a long whistle from the green stalk of a plant.
          On it he whistled, imitating the calls of the
          birds he knew, and so well did he do it that
          the birds answered and came to the yard of the
          great hospital. That sight the other sufferers
          there loved, the sight of Tse-Ne-Gat wrapped in
          his blanket, whistling softly to the birds that
          gathered at his feet to eat of the crumbs he
          scattered for them when they answered his call.

          More troubles came. The white man’s doctor said
          that he might not smoke and live. His cigaret
          was banished. Ma Old Polk was determined that he
          should not smoke, so she fought the craving with
          him as she watched him. Neither did she smoke, for
          his sake, and from the deprivation she suffered
          more than he, only she could slip out to the reeds
          by the river now and then when the demand seemed
          irresistible.

          Back at the reservation, Tse-Ne-Gat felt better.
          The call of the woods grew stronger, and one
          morning Ma Old Polk awoke to find that her son and
          his gun were missing, gone no one knew where. That
          night he returned, exhausted and broken, until he
          could scarcely bear his gun. He wrapped himself
          in his blanket, too tired even to whistle for the
          birds. It was two weeks before the watchful mother
          heard of the rabbits Tse-Ne-Gat had shot but had
          been forced by weakness to throw away before he
          brought them home.

          That is the story that has come to Milwaukee and to
          Tse-Ne-Gat’s attorney here, who cannot help him in
          this fight. Tse-Ne-Gat still goes walking, but not
          so far. He walks as one weary of long traveling.
          Sometimes he disappears for half an hour or more.
          If the doctors suspect that he is following the
          example of his mother and stealing the smoke he
          loves so well, they say nothing. They have nothing
          but sympathy for Tse-Ne-Gat.

          Tse-Ne-Gat has sympathy, too, for the judge who
          gave him justice. For he has learned that on the
          very day that the story of his own rapidly failing
          life had been reported to Judge Robert E. Lewis a
          telegram had come to the judge, telling him that
          his father, Col. Warner Lewis, was dead. Col.
          Warner Lewis was the only survivor of an Indian
          massacre in 1863 near where Coffeyville, Kas., now
          stands. And it was the son of that sole survivor of
          Indian vengeance who gave justice and freedom to
          Tse-Ne-Gat.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SURGICAL OPERATION

          _Milwaukee Sentinel_

          The surgeon’s knife instead of the reformatory; an
          operation in place of an application of “the rod.”

          Is this the manner in which wayward youths are to
          be made good?

          The strange case of Anton Heim, a 14 year old
          Milwaukee lad, at least lends emphasis to the vast
          possibilities for the skilled surgeon as a reformer
          of certain criminally inclined persons.

          As he came from a good family, there seemed to be
          no hereditary reason why Anton should be addicted
          to stealing and other mischievous acts. His case
          was a puzzle until physicians learned that at the
          age of 5 he had been the victim of an accident
          in which a door had fallen on him and caused a
          dent in his skull, and it was their theory that
          the consequent pressure on the brain might have
          unsettled his mind and thus affected his actions.

          The operation was performed on Oct. 19 in Trinity
          hospital by Dr. W. C. F. Witte.

          Since then Anton’s taciturn, irritable disposition
          has given way to ambitious and honest traits. The
          operation has not only meant much for Anton Heim,
          but is full of significance as to possibilities
          along these lines.

          Another case is cited by a Milwaukee physician
          wherein a Norwegian youth who received a skull
          injury in his childhood before coming to America,
          has been relieved through a similar operation and
          been changed from a dependent to a self-supporting
          man.

          “Persons suffering from such skull injuries,”
          explained the physician, “are irritable, depressed
          and subject to an idea that they are being
          persecuted. This Norwegian lad previous to the
          operation was thoroughly shiftless. Now he has
          been holding a position for three years and has
          recovered his ambition and desire to work and save
          money.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          SURGICAL OPERATION

          _Philadelphia Inquirer_

          WASHINGTON, D. C., Aug. 19.--By massaging the heart
          of a colored boy who was apparently dead, doctors
          in the Emergency Hospital succeeded in reviving him.

          The boy was under the influence of chloroform, and
          the surgeon was operating on an infected knee,
          when respiration suddenly ceased. The pulse died
          and finally stopped; the body became cold, the
          limbs rigid. Artificial respiration was resorted
          to, but there was no responding pulsation of the
          heart. After six minutes of suspense, during which
          the physician resorted to every possible method to
          revive the patient, he realized that there was only
          one chance to save the boy’s life.

          With delicate skill he opened the boy’s abdomen and
          for seven minutes massaged the patient’s heart with
          his fingers. Finally, when he was about to give up
          all hope, the boy took a faint voluntary breath,
          and for several minutes the heart pulsated gently.
          Plying the heart with his fingers to stimulate
          circulation of the blood, the physician after
          eighteen minutes had the heart pulsating normally
          and knew that he had succeeded in his almost
          miraculous operation.

          For a day and a half following the operation the
          boy remained in excellent condition and every hope
          was held out for his recovery. But the infection
          of the knee had spread to the left side and had
          infected the glands of the neck. Blood poisoning
          set in and, despite all efforts to save him, the
          boy succumbed.

          The operation on the heart is regarded by medical
          students as unique in the annals of medicine. It
          also opens up a new field in surgery, and means,
          physicians say, that many persons who expire while
          under anesthetics may possibly be revived by such
          methods.

          Within a few months several eminent physicians
          of this city will conduct vivisection tests to
          determine how far the heart massage can be carried.
          Dogs will be placed under anesthetics and allowed
          to succumb, it is said, so that physicians may
          determine after how long an interval an animal
          apparently dead may be restored by heart massage.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUDDEN DEATH

          _Chicago Inter Ocean_

          While joking with several fellow employes over the
          recent baseball trade between the Chicago American
          league baseball team and the New York American
          league team, Robert Nash, 118 Webster Place, a
          clerk employed by Sprague, Warner & Co., 600 West
          Erie street, dropped dead from heart disease
          yesterday in his place of employment.

          Herman Schweitzer, 2849 Christiana avenue, a
          department manager, and J. B. Willott, 508 Melrose
          avenue, were hoaxing Nash about the trade. They
          told Nash that the Chicago team had obtained Chase
          of the New York team, a “hoodoo,” and that they
          would be unable to win any more games.

          Nash laughed at their joke and walked to a chair.
          He fell to the floor, and was dead when a physician
          arrived.

          Nash was one of the oldest employes of the
          Sprague-Warner company. He had been in the grocery
          company for thirty-seven years. Heart disease is
          believed to have caused his death.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ENGINEER’S DYING REQUEST

          _Boston Herald_

          CHICAGO, Dec 21--Charles W. Walter, veteran
          conductor on the Nickel Plate Railroad, died
          yesterday on his run from Bellevue, O, to
          Chicago, and members of the train crew fought snow
          and slippery tracks to carry out Walter’s last
          request that No. 1 be brought in on time, thereby
          preserving his record of never having been late.

          Walter took the train at Bellevue, where he lived,
          at 7:55 a. m. yesterday. An hour later he became
          ill and placed the train in charge of Samuel
          Wilson, an extra passenger conductor.

          “Be sure and bring her in on time, Sam, and keep
          my record clean,” Walter requested. Stops were
          shortened to a minimum. The engineer kept the sand
          running on the slippery rails, and his fireman
          hardly took his hands from the shovel.

          Near Leipsic Junction, where doctors and ambulance
          awaited, Walter died. No. 1 pulled into the
          Lasalle-st Station, Chicago, on the dot. To the
          dispatcher, who was surprised to see him report
          instead of Walter, Wilson said: “Charlie has made
          his last run, and be sure to put it down we’re on
          time.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          WOMAN DIES ALONE

          _Kansas City Star_

          Police officers forced their way into the home of
          Miss Mary R. Wilson, daughter of John H. Wilson, a
          former mayor of Kansas City, at 961 Cane Street,
          shortly before 6 o’clock yesterday afternoon, and
          found her dead in bed in her room on the second
          floor. Dr. Harry Czarlinsky, county coroner, said
          that the cause of death was pneumonia brought on by
          exposure.

          Since the death of her mother seven years ago,
          Miss Wilson had lived in the big house on Cane
          Street alone. She kept no servants and her only
          companion was a pet dog, Danny. Miss Wilson, who
          was more than 50 years old, had ignored the advice
          of friends, who believed she should live with
          relatives.

          She was last seen alive Thursday night, when Mrs.
          B. F. Strong, wife of B. F. Strong, the vicar of
          St. James Church, who lives at 965 Cane Street,
          noticed her moving about in the rear of the house
          with a lamp. Friday passed without either Mrs.
          Strong or Mrs. Albert Hart, the neighbor north of
          the house, seeing Miss Wilson. The snow had drifted
          evenly over the front walk and the blinds at the
          window were drawn.

          Mrs. Hart telephoned Sanford B. Green and Porter
          Home, Miss Wilson’s attorneys. Mr. Green called
          several of Miss Wilson’s intimate friends and was
          unable to find out anything of her whereabouts. He
          then called the chief of police and asked that a
          search of the house be made.

          When the officers entered the room, they found
          Miss Wilson attired in night clothing lying on her
          bed. Her pet, Danny, was curled up at the foot of
          the bed. Weak from want of food, he growled at
          the officers. The coroner said that life had been
          extinct twenty-four hours.

          A small diary which Miss Wilson had kept for years
          testified to her illness. An entry Tuesday read:
          “I haven’t felt well all day.” Wednesday it said:
          “I think the weather has brought on an attack of
          grip.” Thursday’s entry was the last in the book:
          “I know I’m in for a bad case of pneumonia.” No
          explanation can be given why Miss Wilson did
          not get medical attention when she knew she had
          pneumonia.

          Miss Wilson was a niece of the late David Brewer,
          associate judge of the United States Supreme Court.
          Her father figured actively in Kansas City politics
          as a leader of the Democratic party and in 1874
          was elected mayor of this city, a position which
          he held two years. He was a widely known business
          man. Miss Wilson’s only sister, Ella Wilson, died
          in Leavenworth, Kas., in 1865. Her mother, Mrs.
          Alice Strong Wilson, died in the family home on
          Cane Street in 1907. Miss Wilson had no relatives
          in Kansas City.

          The body was taken to the Stine undertaking rooms.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DEATH OF VETERAN FIREMAN

          _Springfield Republican_

          William C. White, 72, veteran fireman, who was
          retired from the active service of the fire
          department last June after 35 years of continuous
          service, died at the Wesson Memorial hospital
          yesterday after a long illness. Mr White had been
          identified with the fire service of the city for
          more than 50 years. During his period of active
          service, Mr White spent most of his time as
          engineer, taking charge during his later years
          of the engines in the North-street fire station.
          During his 35 years of service, Mr White was
          absent from his post only one month, and then on
          account of illness. There was probably no man in
          the department who was better known or who was
          better liked by the men in the department. He was a
          skilful machinist, and his worth to the department
          was frequently recognized by the different chiefs
          under whom he served.

          Mr White was born at Amherst, October 11, 1842. He
          removed with his parents to this city when he was
          12 years old. He received his early education in
          his native town, and after he came here he attended
          the Union-street school. His first employment was
          in the United States armory, where he practically
          completed his trade as machinist. He subsequently
          worked for Smith & Wesson for four years as
          tool-maker, and it was there that he received the
          training which fitted him for his work in the fire
          department. While he was employed at the Smith
          & Wesson shop, he became a call man in the fire
          department. He was appointed to the permanent
          service in 1872, just nine years after he became
          affiliated with the department as a call man.

          His first active duties were as hose-man. He was
          stationed at the old fire station, formerly located
          in the rear of where the Granite building is now.
          His next work was as stoker on the Hanson No 2
          engine, stationed on Sanford street. He later
          became a full-fledged engineer on the old monitor,
          George Dwight. Mr White was later assigned to the
          Pynchon-street engine-house, where he served as
          engineer on the No 1 engine. He was stationed there
          from 1872 until 1876. In 1876 he was transferred
          to the Bond-street engine-house, where he remained
          until his retirement in June. It was a matter of
          notable record in the fire department that during
          all this time he ran the old No 1 engine without
          experiencing any accidents or having his engine
          tied up because of failure to work properly.

          When Mr White first became affiliated with the
          fire department there were but four companies,
          with 26 men each, in service in the city. The
          companies were located on Pynchon street, on the
          Hill, near the old railroad station, and on Sanford
          street. During the early ’70’s the system of
          naming fire engines was succeeded by the present
          system of numbering them. When Mr White entered
          the service, L. H. Powers was chief engineer, and
          he was succeeded by Hosea Lombard. It was during
          his regime as chief that the present department
          actually came into existence. It is a singular fact
          that Mr White saw service in the department during
          the period that Springfield experienced its biggest
          fires. From the date of his connection with the
          department until his retirement there were seven
          very disastrous fires.

          During his many years in the department he was
          constantly drafted from one engine-house to
          another to do repair work. His expert knowledge
          of apparatus made him invaluable in this respect.
          When the company at the Bond-street engine-house
          was transferred to the North-street station several
          years ago, he went with it and remained there until
          his retirement, June 15 of this year. Mr White held
          several patents on devices used on fire apparatus,
          but never troubled to have them put on the market.
          Some of these devices, however, have been used with
          satisfaction.

          Mr White was taken ill last May, and it was with
          difficulty that he was persuaded to leave the
          active list. He eventually went to the Wesson
          Memorial hospital, where he remained constantly
          until his death yesterday. Mr White was married,
          and for many years lived at 961 Second street.
          His wife died a number of years ago, and since
          that time he has made his home at the North-street
          fire station. He was a member of De Soto lodge of
          Odd Fellows and of the Firemen’s aid association.
          He leaves no near relatives, but Arthur Green,
          secretary of the Putnam woolen mills at Putnam,
          Ct., a cousin, is expected in this city to take
          charge of the funeral.

          The funeral will be held to-morrow afternoon at
          Washburn’s chapel. Rev Dr Frank W. Merrick of Faith
          church will officiate. The burial will be in the
          Springfield cemetery.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DEATH OF A POLITICIAN

          _New York Times_

          Martin Engel is dead. This does not mean anything
          to those unacquainted with New York politics,
          nor to those whose political interests have been
          quite recently developed, but to the “old-time”
          politicians familiar with the days when “Boss”
          Croker ruled Tammany Hall and “Big Tim” Sullivan
          was the man highest up in the Bowery district the
          death of Martin Engel means the passing of another
          of the Tammany leaders who led when to be an east
          side leader was greater than to be a silk-stocking
          Republican.

          At the age of 68, several years after he had lost
          his leadership in the old Eighth District--“De
          Ate,” to those who were of it and in it in the
          “good old days”--Martin Engel died yesterday in
          his home at 29 East Third Street. He made money in
          his business of politics, and it is said that his
          son, Alfred S. Engel, will inherit a comfortable
          fortune. His death was due to Bright’s disease,
          from which he had been a sufferer for some time.

          Martin Engel rose to political power when the
          immigrant Jews from Russia, Rumania, Bohemia, and
          Hungary began to crowd the Irish out of the east
          side. The son of a “kosher” butcher, he was born in
          the Bowery and began life, after leaving the public
          schools, in his father’s butcher shop. After the
          death of the father he continued the business, and
          even after his business became politics and his
          “office” for all important purposes was in “Silver
          Dollar” Smith’s Hotel, near the Essex Market Court,
          he remained the nominal head of the market, from
          which fact he became known in the east side as
          “Butcher” Engel.

          “Big Tim” Sullivan, Irishman, and Martin Engel,
          Jew, were the combination that held the power
          in “De Ate,” where fully 80 per cent. of the
          fixed and floating voters spoke Yiddish. Engel
          was apparently devoted to Sullivan, and was ever
          faithful to “Big Tim” in matters political, and,
          until the Republican leader, “Charley” Adler, began
          to make trouble in the Eighth, he always “swung the
          district” at election time.

          Those who followed Engel as their political leader
          could never, in their own opinion, exaggerate his
          virtues. He was generous, as all Tammany leaders
          of the east side have been, and he was successful
          in “landing jobs” for those who served the party.
          Also he was known to have a strong “pull” with
          the police, and many an east side youth who “got
          in bad” with the authorities owed his liberty to
          Engel’s influence. Because of all these things he
          was the leader, and because he was the leader he
          cultivated the character and quality that enhanced
          his leadership.

          But to reformers Engel was the personification of a
          vice that, though seen with disturbing frequency,
          could never be even endured, much less embraced. In
          “De Ate” was what was known for many years as “The
          Red Light District.” Engel’s political enemies used
          to dwell with views of alarm upon the protection
          under which the district thrived, and Engel was
          always named as the protector.

          Those who have seen Engel remember as his most
          striking facial characteristic a “dented” nose.
          The bridge of his nose had been broken, and until
          his death there was a depression in the centre of
          his face that never failed to attract attention.
          The scar was a mark of Engel’s rise to political
          power. He received the original injury in a fight
          years ago--and there have been stories of this
          fight to Engel’s credit and to his discredit. The
          only positive and printable fact is that a man who
          became enraged against Engel struck him across his
          nose with a bung-starter or some other equally
          destructive weapon.

          Besides “Silver Dollar” Smith’s hotel, which
          later became the property of Engel himself, the
          leader of “De Ate” had several “headquarters” in
          the district where those who knew his habits and
          haunts might find him. His home was at 29 East
          Third Street, where he died; but in the days of
          his power he could be found most often at some of
          his “hanging-out” places--such as the clubrooms of
          the Martin Engel Association, at Ludlow and Grand
          Streets, or the old Café Boulevard, in Second
          Avenue, where, for a number of years, he regularly
          received his henchmen between noon and 3 o’clock.

          Although the kind of politics accepted as
          legitimate by Engel is passing for the good of
          society, there are those in the east side who will
          feel real regret for the death of their former
          leader, for whatever his vices were, Engel was
          sympathetic and generous in his own way and in
          his moods, and many a family would not have eaten
          had he not supplied a meal, many a man or woman
          would have gone barefoot had he not furnished
          shoes. Also, many a “down-and-outer” would have
          gone thirsty if Engel had not “set ’em up” to the
          drinks. So, somewhere east of the Bowery, where
          there were not many of the Ten Commandments, and
          where a man could raise a very great thirst, Engel
          had his friends who will mourn him now.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DEATH

          _New York Evening Post_

          The odor from the chestnut roasters is as fragrant
          as ever, the heaped-up mounds of lettuce and kale
          on the mile of push carts are just as crisp and
          green, and there is the same glistening sheen on
          the pyramids of green and scarlet peppers, but,
          nevertheless, things seemed altogether different
          in Mulberry Bend to-day. There was less noise, the
          hurdie-gurdies were not playing, and groups of
          dark-haired women talked solemnly on the corners.

          Down in front of No. 26 there were many children
          looking into the window, but, unlike children of
          the Bend, making no noise. That’s where the cause
          of all this change was. For No. 26 is Charles
          Bacigalupo’s chapel and undertaking rooms, where
          for twenty-eight years the services for the
          dead of the Italian colony have been held; and
          now--Bacigalupo himself is dead.

          He was much more than an undertaker. He was a
          benefactor of the quarter, a man with a motto of
          his own that he lived up to. It hardly could be
          called a business motto, but Bacigalupo always
          adhered to it in his business, and it was that no
          Italian should be buried in the Potter’s Field, if
          he could help it.

          A north of Italy man and a devout Catholic himself,
          “Charlie,” as the colony called him, never asked
          what a dead man’s religion had been or whether he
          was Sicilian, Neapolitan, or Genoese. The chapel
          was always open, day and night, and there was
          always a hearse and at least one carriage ready
          whether there was anything to pay for them or not.

          It was so in the beginning, twenty-eight years ago,
          when Bacigalupo, who had come to the country when
          he was thirteen, decided that he would no longer
          work for undertakers by day and black boots on
          Broadway in the evening, but go into business for
          himself.

          He had saved money enough then to buy a second-hand
          hearse and a dilapidated hack. At the outset he
          had to hire the horses, and the only room in which
          he could do his work was the one room in which he
          lived.

          Within a week after this start an Italian was
          murdered on Mulberry Street. Nobody knew him, and
          the body, after the coroner had got his routine
          description of all the knife wounds for repetition
          in court, was to go to Potter’s Field--after the
          usual custom. But Bacigalupo changed the custom so
          far as Mulberry Bend was concerned. There was a
          real funeral in his room for the unknown victim of
          the stiletto, and the man who could not afford to
          keep his own horses did all the work and paid all
          the bills.

          That was when the motto was adopted, and the
          records at Bacigalupo’s chapel today show that
          he has saved nearly a thousand “unknowns” and
          “unfortunates” from the Potter’s Field.

          Most of them were Italians, but some were the more
          unfortunate white girls of Chinatown.

          He prospered in spite of all this free service and
          he has averaged three funerals a day for ten days.
          From the one room his place developed into a whole
          floor, and for the living room in which services
          were held for that murdered Italian twenty-eight
          years ago, there was substituted a fine chapel with
          altar fires and many pictures and tapestries, which
          Bacigalupo brought from Rome on his return from
          frequent visits to his home country.

          But as gorgeous and elegant as the place became, in
          the eyes of the Italian quarter, it was still free
          for all who could not pay.

          Bacigalupo never talked about these things himself
          when asked about his business life in the Bend. It
          was his private business, the number of big black
          hearses he sent, free of charge, for the laborers
          who had died while out of work, and the number of
          small white hearses with the angel figures on the
          side which he had provided for the children whose
          parents were penniless. Neither would he talk about
          the times he had paid other people’s coal bills or
          put a stop to dispossession proceedings by paying
          the rent of people whom he simply knew as Italians.

          And only his intimate associates knew that he owned
          a half-acre in Greenwood Cemetery and another big
          lot in Calvary, in which he put the bodies which
          otherwise would have gone to the graveyard of the
          morgue’s unknown.

          All these things Bacigalupo was remarkably reticent
          about. On the other hand, there were some things
          that he liked to boast of. He used to say, for
          instance, that the proudest day in his life was
          that in which he drove, himself, the second coach
          in Gen. Grant’s funeral. He groomed his own horses
          for that procession.

          And when Meucci, the Italian patriot who came over
          with Garibaldi, died on Staten Island Bacigalupo
          had charge of the big Italian funeral service, in
          Tammany Hall, and it was the undertaker of Mulberry
          Bend who prepared the revolutionist’s body for
          shipment to Italy.

          When King Humbert was assassinated Bacigalupo had
          charge of the memorial service in this city. And
          now the most conspicuous pictures at the entrance
          to the chapel are those of the dead King and of
          President McKinley, both nearly life size.

          Bacigalupo also took a little pardonable pride
          in the fact that his establishment had grown to
          include a big stable with 250 horses, 10 hearses,
          and many coaches; that he had the only automobile
          hearse in town, and that it was he who introduced
          the custom of having dirge-playing bands in the
          funeral processions on the Bend.

          Four years ago Bacigalupo went to Rome to present
          to the Pope $5,000 which had been contributed by
          the immigrants in the Italian quarter, and to the
          money he added as his own gift a wonderful jewelled
          robe for his holiness. The Pope granted him an
          audience and gave him his picture and autograph,
          which Bacigalupo brought back to Mulberry Street.

          Then there was that wonderful Chinese funeral
          several years ago when the bones of nine Chinamen
          were removed from a Brooklyn cemetery and sent back
          to the ancestral graveyards in China. Bacigalupo
          had that affair, and it overtaxed even his stable
          resources, for there were 300 coaches in the
          procession that wound through the streets of
          Chinatown, all filled with Chinamen, while the rest
          of the Mott and Pell Street colony walked behind
          over the route laid out for them by the Italian.

          These were the things that the undertaker was
          willing to talk about when he was asked what he
          had done in America. But they are of secondary
          importance on the Bend to-day. It is the coal
          bills, and helps with the rent in hard times, and
          the free funerals that everybody in the quarter,
          including the policemen on their beats and the one
          black native from Abyssinia who speaks Italian, are
          talking about now that the crepe is on Bacigalupo’s
          own door.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DEATH OF GREAT EDITOR

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          KANSAS CITY, Mo., April 13.--Colonel William
          Rockhill Nelson, founder, owner and editor of
          the Kansas City Star, died at his home here this
          morning. He was 74 years old, and had been
          confined to his home since last December. Uremic
          poisoning caused his death.

          Colonel Nelson took an active part in the
          management of the Star until about a month ago,
          for even after his illness began members of the
          Star staff gathered at his bedside several times
          weekly for discussion of questions of editorial
          policy. At these conferences he dictated editorials
          and outlined ideas for cartoons and special news
          articles. Although his physicians advised against
          this activity, he reminded them that it was in the
          building of the Star he had been happiest.

          A day or so before he became unconscious Colonel
          Nelson said to a friend:

          “The Lord has been far better to me than I deserve.
          I have had a long and happy life, with great
          opportunities for usefulness. My only regret is
          that I have not accomplished more. If this is the
          end, I am ready.”

          Throughout his illness the problem of the poor was
          of intense concern to him. He made large gifts to
          local charitable institutions and was absorbed in
          the work of a soup kitchen, which his daughter,
          Mrs. Kirkwood, inaugurated and conducted.

          While no formal statement was made, it was
          announced that “as far as is humanly possible, the
          Star will be conducted in accordance with the aims
          and ideas of Mr. Nelson.”

          Although Colonel Nelson did not enter the newspaper
          field until he was nearly 40 years old, he brought
          to it such ability and energy that he built up one
          of the greatest newspapers of the country. He was
          born in Fort Wayne, Ind., in 1841, and was educated
          at Notre Dame University. After a short experience
          in cotton growing he became a general contractor.
          When 34 years old he was Samuel J. Tilden’s Indiana
          campaign manager.

          His interest in political leadership caused him
          to turn to newspaper work. He bought an interest
          in the Fort Wayne Sentinel and a business reverse
          caused him to decide to devote all his time to
          journalism. He and his Fort Wayne partner, Samuel
          E. Morss, went to Kansas City and started the
          Evening Star on September 18, 1880. Mr. Morss
          withdrew after a few months.

          When the Kansas City Times failed, in 1901, the
          Star bought that paper and its news franchise. The
          venture proved a marked success, and the Star now
          has a circulation, morning and evening, of more
          than 200,000 a day.

          In politics Colonel Nelson was, as he often said,
          “independent, but never neutral.” He never would
          consider any elective or appointive position.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DEATH OF COLLEGE DEAN

          _New York Evening Post_

          John Howard Van Amringe, former dean of Columbia
          College, where for half a century he endeared
          himself to thousands of students, who knew him best
          as “Van Am,” died suddenly yesterday at the Keeler
          House, in Morristown, N. J. Professor Van Amringe,
          who was seventy-nine years old last spring, retired
          from the Columbia faculty five years ago, and for
          some time past his health has been failing. He
          suffered a stroke of apoplexy just before luncheon,
          and died within an hour. His daughter, Miss Emily
          Van Amringe, was with him.

          The story of the venerable ex-dean’s life is
          almost a history of Columbia College for the last
          fifty-odd years. To Columbia men he was more than
          a teacher. As Charles Halsted Mapes remarked, when
          the alumni presented a bronze bust of the dean to
          the Columbia University Club, in 1913: “Van Am
          has become more than a mere man to us; he is a
          sentiment. What the Yale fence is to Yale, the ivy
          to Princeton, Van Am is to Columbia--a tangible,
          concrete expression of sentiment to which our
          memories lovingly cling.”

          He was born at Philadelphia, on April 3, 1836, the
          son of William Frederic and Susan Budd (Sterling)
          Van Amringe. His grandfather, Lionel Van Amringe,
          was a soldier under Frederick the Great, and
          emigrated from Holland in 1791. His family removed
          from Philadelphia to New York in 1841. He received
          most of his early education from his father, but
          was later sent to the Montgomery Academy, Orange
          County, N. Y., where his father was instructor for
          a time. In 1854 he entered Yale, and would have
          graduated in 1858, but left the College at the end
          of his sophomore year and taught private pupils for
          two years. In the fall of 1858 he entered Columbia
          College as a member of the junior class, graduating
          with the degree of B.A. in 1860.

          Van Amringe, the undergraduate, displayed a
          fondness for mathematics and debating, and in
          after years these were always his favorite
          subjects. Those who listened to him in more recent
          years, addressing undergraduate mass meetings or
          speaking at alumni reunions, or presenting some
          distinguished candidate for this or that honorary
          degree on commencement day, could trace his flow of
          oratory back to its beginnings in the classroom,
          where, as a student, he used to hold forth in the
          presence of old Professor Nairne, who taught moral
          and intellectual philosophy and literature. Nairne
          had a way of holding impromptu debates in the
          classroom, pitting one student against another. But
          it was in mathematics that Van Amringe excelled,
          and he taught this subject to generations of
          Columbia men.

          When Van Am came to Columbia he was possessed of a
          brilliant head of red hair, which in later years
          turned white. He also wore flowing moustaches, and
          these became immortalized in the song that Columbia
          men never tire of singing:

            D’ye ken Van Am with his snowy hair,
            D’ye ken Van Am with his whiskers rare,
            D’ye ken Van Am with his martial air,
              As he crosses the Quad in the morning?

          CHORUS.

            The sight of Van Am raised my hat from my head,
            And the sound of his voice often filled me with dread,
            Oh, I shook in my boots at the things that he said
              When he asked me to call in the morning.

            Yes, I ken’d Van Am, to my sorrow, too,
            When I was a freshman of verdant hue.
            First a cut, then a bar, then an interview
              With the Dean in his den in the morning.

            But we love Van Am from our heart and soul,
            Let’s drink to his health! Let’s finish the bowl!
            We’ll swear by Van Am through fair and through foul,
              And wish him the top o’ the morning.

            D’ye ken Van Am with his fine old way,
            The Dean of Columbia for many a day?
            Long may he live and long may he stay
              Where his voice may be heard in the morning.

          One of his undertakings at Columbia was the
          organization of the Alumni Association of Columbia
          College, which he began as soon as he had become an
          alumnus himself. The Association was then more dead
          than alive, but through his efforts it has become
          the most flourishing and influential of all the
          Columbia alumni organizations.

          The dean had few outside interests; his life was
          devoted almost entirely to Columbia, and the few
          other activities in which he engaged were closely
          allied to his work at the College. He was a member
          of the American Mathematical Society and of the
          New York Historical Society, and, at one time, was
          president of the New York Mathematical Society.
          He was also a fellow of the American Association
          for the Advancement of Science and a vestryman of
          Trinity Church. Some years ago he edited a series
          of Davies’s mathematical works.

          As prime mover in the organization of the Columbia
          University Club, he was its first president, and
          there never has been any other.

          As an authority on matters relating to the history
          of the University he was without an equal. He
          wrote a “History of Columbia College,” and to the
          volume known as “Universities and Their Sons” he
          contributed the Columbia section.

          One of the things that endeared him most to
          Columbia men was his championship of football. In
          1905, after Columbia had been severely criticised
          for her football tactics, and the faculty, in a
          historic meeting, decided that the sport should
          be dropped, the Dean was the only friend the
          undergraduates had. In that meeting he took
          the stand of the undergraduates and earnestly
          championed the game. After the close of the
          football season of 1906 more than two thousand
          students stormed the Faculty Club, where the Dean
          was at lunch, and, after singing his song, demanded
          that he make a speech to them on football. They
          told him they wanted football, and he said: “I know
          that, but you know I cannot give it to you. You
          have behaved as I have always known you to behave,
          with propriety and dignity, and if you keep on
          there’s no telling what you may get.”

          Football will be played once more at Columbia this
          year, and more than one alumnus will regret that
          the venerable Van Am is not in the stands when the
          opening game is played on South Field.

          At the time when Columbia began to expand from a
          college to a university of many departments, the
          proposal to do away with the college altogether,
          and to convert Columbia into a group of graduate
          schools, was considered. The idea “took” with
          some of the authorities, and had it not been for
          vigorous opposition, in which Van Am took a leading
          part, it is not unlikely that the change would have
          been made.

          When it became known, in the spring of 1910, that
          the dean was to retire, the students prepared a
          petition to the faculty, asking them to place him
          on the roll as dean emeritus. The parchment was
          afterward framed and hung in the Trophy Room.

          At the dinner given by the Columbia alumni to
          celebrate Dean Van Amringe’s fiftieth year of
          connection with the University, the presiding
          officer read from Oliver Wendell Holmes’s class-day
          poem, and turned to the venerable dean as he quoted:

            Was it snowing, I spoke of. Excuse the mistake!
            Look close--and you’ll see not a sign of a flake!
            We want some new garlands for those we have shed,
            And these are white roses instead of the red.




CHAPTER X

POLITICS AND ELECTIONS


Most political news falls into one of the general classes of stories
already considered. Party conventions, campaign meetings, political
speeches, interviews with candidates and party managers, for example,
are treated like similar material in other fields. Elections, on
the other hand, require a different handling. Three common kinds of
election stories are: (1) an analysis of political conditions preceding
an election with or without a forecast of the result, (2) a description
of election day conditions and events, (3) the results of the election.

Although some newspapers are sufficiently independent in politics to
treat political news without partisan bias, many papers still present
such news from the point of view of their editorial policy. There is a
growing tendency, however, to present both sides fairly in news columns
and to confine partisanship to editorials.

Election return stories consist largely of summaries of the most
important results of the election, such as: (1) the candidates
elected and defeated, (2) the majority or plurality of the successful
candidates, (3) the effect of the election on the political complexion
of legislative bodies, (4) causes of victory and defeat, (5) statements
by candidates and party managers in regard to the results.

          *       *       *       *       *

          POLITICAL FORECAST

          _Springfield Republican_

          Estimates as to the relative strength of the
          three leading political parties are at variance,
          but some of the best informed politicians are of
          the opinion that the alignment this year will be
          vastly different from what it was last year. Local
          political workers are of the opinion that the
          republican vote for governor in this section this
          year will be much larger than it was last year.
          This contention is made by prominent republicans
          who have canvassed the western counties very
          carefully, and who have done considerable campaign
          work in this section. Their predictions are made
          on the ground that the republican candidate last
          year antagonized a large element in the party, who
          either voted for Gov Walsh or for Mr Bird or did
          not vote at all. The check lists in almost every
          town and city in Western Massachusetts, with the
          exception of a few places in Berkshire, showed that
          the average republican vote last year was about 75
          per cent of the normal vote of the party.

          The leaders figure that Mr McCall will command a
          large percentage of the republican vote that was
          lost last year. They likewise figure that both
          Joseph Walker and Gov Walsh will suffer serious
          defections this year. They believe that Mr Walker
          will not poll more than two-thirds of the vote
          polled by Mr Bird last year. They figure that Gov
          Walsh will lose at least 5 per cent of his vote
          of last year. If these predictions should come
          true, they say that Mr McCall would profit by the
          defections from the other candidates. This would
          mean a close call for Gov Walsh and possibly his
          defeat.

          While the democrats and progressives express
          confidence that their respective candidates will
          be winners, politicians who are not showing any
          active interest in the campaign believe that
          the contentions made by the republicans deserve
          consideration. Figuring on the basis of last year’s
          vote, local republicans predict that Gov Walsh
          will be fortunate if he receives 175,000 votes.
          This would mean a loss of about 8000 from his
          vote of last year. Should the progressives poll
          80,000, they would suffer a loss of about 43,000
          on the vote for governor. These defections would
          probably go to Mr McCall, who then would come very
          close to defeating the democratic candidate. The
          figures submitted are not impossible, as the vote
          last year indicates. Mr Bird, then candidate for
          governor, ran far ahead of the other candidates
          on the progressive ticket. This in itself shows
          that the true strength of the party was more
          nearly represented in the vote cast for the other
          candidates on the ticket than for the candidate for
          governor.

          Western Massachusetts may not prove to be such a
          tremendous factor in deciding the campaign this
          year, but if the signs of the times are read
          correctly, Mr McCall will receive an unusually
          large vote throughout this section of the state.
          It is quite probable that Mr Walker may command a
          sizeable vote, but his strength is not apparent
          now. The injection of prohibition into the
          progressive campaign is thought to have injured the
          Walker cause, not because the average progressive
          is opposed to prohibition, but because many of
          them believe that the cause of prohibition should
          be confined to the party that raised it as an
          issue. The enthusiasm which characterized the
          progressive campaigns in the two years past is
          noticeably absent this year. Try as the leaders
          will, they cannot raise the excitement of former
          years, and this is not a healthy sign in the
          opinion of those who have followed politics closely.

          The progressives, however, maintain that they have
          not suffered any losses, and they again predict a
          large vote this fall. Richard J. Talbot, chairman
          of the progressive city committee, claims that
          one-third of the new registration will be found
          voting with the progressives on election day. Mr
          Talbot likewise goes on record as predicting that
          the contest for governor this year will be between
          Mr Walsh and Mr Walker. He believes that Mr McCall
          will run third, as Mr Gardner did last year.

          The progressives and the democrats will follow
          closely on the heels of the republican spellbinders
          who will invade the city Monday evening. A big
          republican rally is planned for that evening when
          Mr McCall, Senator Burton and Congressman Gillett
          will be heard. The local republican city committee
          has planned a reception for the candidates from
          7.15 until 8 o’clock. The rally will be held in the
          Auditorium. The democrats will hold their rally in
          the Auditorium on Wednesday evening, the 28th, and
          it is possible that the progressives will follow on
          the 29th or 30th.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ELECTION DAY

          _New York Times_

          The fair weather and the fact that the new modified
          Massachusetts ballot gave the voters little trouble
          made ideal conditions yesterday for rapid voting.

          Voters began to crowd polling places within five
          minutes after the polls opened at 6 o’clock. They
          voted in steady streams until 9 o’clock, when the
          first lull set in, and a tabulation of figures
          revealed the fact that nearly half the votes were
          cast.

          It was a record for early voting for any election
          in recent years. By noon 65 per cent. of the
          total vote was in, and at 4 o’clock reports
          indicated that the late afternoon rush would be
          inconsequential, as 85 per cent. of the vote had
          already been cast. The total vote was recorded in
          several election districts more than an hour before
          the polls were scheduled to be closed.

          Trouble had been expected from the new ballots, but
          as voter after voter emerged from the voting booths
          within a minute after entering, the watchers began
          to gain confidence that the day would pass without
          serious confusion.

          In the districts near Columbia University some
          voters took as long as nine minutes to vote,
          their extreme deliberation indicating that they
          were splitting their tickets with much care. In
          the downtown districts political parties set up
          sample voting places as near to the polls as the
          law would allow. With sample ballots and the aid
          of instructors, they taught the voters who had not
          had the opportunity to familiarize themselves with
          the new ballots earlier, how to vote in the normal
          amount of time.

          The “place of stay” voters were conspicuous by
          their absence. Watchers for the Honest Ballot
          Association, who were employed in squads of 100
          members each, scoured the city with warrants for
          the arrest of men who were suspected, but they
          went empty-handed for the most part, although they
          challenged a few suspects.

          One young man became very indignant and wanted
          to fight when challenged. He rushed into the
          office of Supt. of Elections Voorhis, denouncing
          everybody in general connected with the election,
          and demanding that an escort be given to him to
          see that he got his legal chance to vote. He was
          asked where he voted last year and he said in New
          Jersey, insisting, however, that he had lived here
          a year since that time. Supt. Voorhis with a smile
          informed the young man that the election last year
          was on Nov. 4, so that if he swore in his vote this
          year he “would be taking a pretty long chance.” He
          changed his belligerent mood at once and left, with
          thanks for Mr. Voorhis’s warning.

          The only serious quarrel of the day occurred
          at the opening of the polls in the Fourteenth
          Election District of the Eighth Assembly District
          at 180 Eldridge Street. A Democratic Captain
          objected to Joseph Strulowitz as a member of the
          Board of Inspectors. Strulowitz was supported
          by Misha Hymowitz, Chairman of the board, and a
          seventeen-minute argument ensued that sometimes
          grew so warm that bystanders had to separate the
          contenders.

          While it lasted not a single vote could be cast,
          and it was finally settled by the protests of more
          than 100 voters, who urged that they had to be on
          their way to work and couldn’t afford to stand
          about just to see a row. Strulowitz finally was
          permitted to take his place. Supt. Voorhis had to
          send a Special Inspector to a Brooklyn election
          district on receiving a report from a Deputy that
          only three Inspectors instead of four, as provided
          by law, were on duty.

          Mr. Voorhis sent out 300 Deputies in a search
          for election frauds. Upon receiving reports from
          them as to the speed and quietness of the voting
          throughout the city, Mr. Voorhis announced that it
          was the quietest and most smoothly working Election
          Day he had ever known.

          The entrance of former football stars into the
          business of watching the polls provided in some
          districts an element of interest that almost
          overshadowed the voting. L. Bigelow, Jr., Captain
          of Yale’s football team in 1907, led the football
          forces that had volunteered as watchers. He was
          the centre of admiring throngs of boys when he
          visited voting places in lower Fifth Avenue. With
          him were Walter Logan and John Kilpatrick, ends on
          the Yale team in 1910; “Pop” Foster, a Yale tackle
          in 1908; Arthur Howe, an All-American quarter back,
          selected from the Yale team of 1910; S. D. Baker of
          Princeton, and “Big Ed” Farley of Harvard.

          The football squad worked with 250 college men,
          who were registered as members of the Volunteer
          Watchers’ League and were under the direct control
          of Assistant District Attorney Weller. Some of them
          remained in automobiles at the Criminal Courts
          Building ready to respond on an instant’s notice to
          any call for help.

          A bit of humor that enlivened the day in the upper
          east side was contributed by the fact that four
          Election Inspectors, a ballot clerk, a poll clerk,
          and a policeman had to remain on duty all day at an
          election district where the entire vote was cast
          at 9 o’clock and there was no possible prospect of
          getting any more votes through the long day’s wait.
          The voteless watch occurred at the Forty-seventh
          Election District of the Nineteenth Assembly
          District at McGowan’s Pass Tavern in Central Park.
          At 8:58 o’clock 50 per cent. of the district’s vote
          was cast when Max Boehm cast his vote, and the
          other 50 per cent. was cast when Max Boehm’s son
          Bertrand emerged from the booth two minutes later.
          They were the only two registered voters in the
          district.

          Women from the Women’s Political Union visited the
          different polling places distributing suffrage
          literature. The women were on duty, some of
          them from 6 A. M., and they remained until the
          close. Hundreds of women passed in and out of the
          headquarters of the union at 25 East Forty-fifth
          Street during the day to get literature and
          directions for distribution. Mrs. Harriot Stanton
          Blatch, the President, was at 623 Columbus Avenue,
          her own district, with her daughter and little
          granddaughter, the latter distributing literature
          with her elders. Mrs. John Winters Brannan was at
          the polls in the cigar shop, 103 West Forty-sixth
          Street, and Miss Anna Constable, at 631 Park
          Avenue. Polling places on the lower east side were
          thoroughly covered by the women.

          *       *       *       *       *

          STATE ELECTION RESULTS

          _New York World_

          (Lead only)

          By a change of more than 330,000 votes the electors
          of New York State yesterday brought about these
          results:

          Swept the Democratic party from the control of the
          New York State government by electing Charles S.
          Whitman, the Republican candidate, Governor by a
          plurality of 129,642 over Martin H. Glynn, Democrat.

          Elected James W. Wadsworth jr., Republican, to
          the seat in the Senate now held by Elihu Root,
          over James W. Gerard, by a plurality of probably
          55,000. Mr. Gerard, however, ran many thousands of
          votes ahead of Mr. Glynn, not only in the City of
          New York but in the country districts. He received
          132,000 plurality in New York City; Mr. Glynn
          57,000.

          Turned over to the Republicans the control of
          both branches of the Legislature, the next
          Senate probably containing 32 Republicans and 19
          Democrats, and the Assembly 106 Republicans and 44
          Democrats.

          Reduced the Democratic representation in the New
          York delegation to the House of Representatives
          from 31 to 23.

          Gave a surprisingly large vote to William Sulzer,
          the Prohibition-Progressive-American candidate for
          Governor, not only in the country districts, but
          in the Tammany stronghold of Manhattan. He carried
          Steuben County by 300.

          Showed a slump in the Progressive vote in every
          part of the State, in some instances the number of
          ballots cast for Mr. Davenport, the Progressive
          candidate for Governor, being negligible. The total
          Progressive vote was apparently about one-fifth of
          the 393,183 given Mr. Straus two years ago.

          *       *       *       *       *

          STATE ELECTION RETURNS

          _New York Times_

          PHILADELPHIA, Nov. 3.--Boies Penrose was re-elected
          to the United States Senate today by a plurality
          approaching 100,000.

          Dr. Martin Brumbaugh, Republican candidate for
          Governor, was elected by more than 125,000, and
          the entire Republican State ticket was swept into
          office, according to latest unofficial returns from
          all parts of Pennsylvania.

          This estimate is based upon the heavy Republican
          vote polled in Philadelphia and Pittsburgh and the
          sweep of the Republican column in such Democratic
          strongholds as Lehigh and Lycoming Counties.

          The commanding lead of the Republicans indicates
          that the Democratic delegation in the National
          House of Representatives will be reduced from
          twelve to seven, the Progressive delegation reduced
          from seven to two, and the Republicans increased
          from 17 to 27.

          The Republicans will have a large majority in both
          Houses of the State Legislature.

          Until late tonight, Democratic State leaders
          claimed the election of Vance McCormick, Democratic
          candidate for Governor, by 135,000, despite the
          all-apparent Republican victory. Progressive State
          leaders admitted defeat shortly before midnight.

          A. Nevin Detrick, State Chairman of the Progressive
          Party, said tonight:

            Returns indicate an overwhelming victory for
            Penrose and Brumbaugh. I attribute this vote to a
            revulsion against the Democratic Administration
            and the belief on the part of the electorate that
            the Republican Party is the instrument through
            which there will be a revival of prosperity.

            State issues seem to have been lost sight of by
            the voters, and the entire result is apparently
            based on national traditions. Returns from over
            the State are too meagre to predict from as to
            the district, Congressional, and Legislative
            candidates, but there is little doubt that the
            returns for the head of the ticket will prevail
            throughout the list.

          Gifford Pinchot, Progressive candidate for United
          States Senator, said:

            During the campaign just ended, I made the
            statement that, win or lose, I would keep on
            with the fight for the conservation of natural
            resources for the use of the people, against
            the monopolies and special interests, and in
            particular against the kind of government that
            Penrose represents. I reaffirm that statement now.

          A. Mitchell Palmer, Democratic candidate for
          United States Senator, ran second, with Pinchot,
          Progressive, third. Palmer commanded a much larger
          vote than had been conceded by the opposition
          leaders.

          The four Republican Congressmen at large, Scott,
          Crago, Lafean, and Garland, were elected, and the
          Republicans in all probability have carried into
          office nineteen of the twenty-seven members of the
          State Senate.

          Latest returns from this city indicate that
          Brumbaugh carried Philadelphia by a majority of
          115,000 and Penrose by 100,000. Republican leaders
          in Philadelphia asserted that this sweep meant that
          the full Philadelphia delegation of six Congressmen
          had been won by the Republicans.

          The vote throughout Pennsylvania was exceptionally
          heavy, and it is estimated that upward of 1,000,000
          citizens went to the polls.

          While no estimate of the complete Pinchot vote is
          yet possible, it is believed that Col. Roosevelt’s
          recent invasion of Pennsylvania aided little in
          bringing support.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CITY ELECTION RETURNS

          _St. Louis Globe-Democrat_

          The St. Louis vote in Tuesday’s election was a
          landslide for the Republicans.

          The tabulated vote from all the 474 precincts
          shows majorities ranging from 3000 to 25,000. The
          St. Louis County vote also was carried by the
          Republicans.

          The final count shows that the Democrats elected
          only one congressman, three members of the
          Legislature, four justices of the peace and four
          constables.

          The home rule police and excise laws carried in St.
          Louis by a majority of 8400. The vote in the state,
          however, defeated the home rule laws.

          The woman suffrage amendment received a hard blow
          in St. Louis, the majority against it being 57,135.

          The total Republican and Democratic vote in St.
          Louis is estimated at 114,000. The vote of the
          Progressive party almost disappeared. Arthur N.
          Sager, the Progressive candidate for United States
          senator, polled only 1600 votes.

          The Socialist vote, which has not been tabulated,
          is estimated at about 8000.

          The Republican ticket was led by Howard Sidener,
          candidate for re-election for prosecuting attorney.
          His plurality was more than 25,000 over Walter A.
          Kelly, the Democratic candidate. The plurality of
          Louis Alt for license collector was over 25,000. He
          defeated Dennis P. O’Brien, Democrat.

          Karl Kimmel defeated Glendy B. Arnold, who led the
          Democratic judicial ticket, by 3000 votes. George
          H. Shields, Republican, had a plurality of 15,378
          over John J. O’Brien, low man on the Democratic
          judicial ticket.

          By a majority of more than 14,000 over Edward
          A. Feehan, Democrat, Charles W. Holtcamp was
          re-elected probate judge. For each of the more
          important offices, the Republican candidates’
          pluralities exceeded 12,000.

          By the election of L. C. Dyer in the Twelfth
          District over John P. Collins, the Republicans
          will gain one congressman from St. Louis. Henry A.
          Hamilton, the Republican candidate in the Eleventh
          District, was defeated by William L. Igoe by a
          plurality of more than 1900. Collins lost to Dyer
          by 2100.

          Jacob E. Meeker, Republican candidate, was elected
          in the Tenth District by a plurality over Francis
          M. Curlee of more than 14,000 in the city. Meeker,
          who will succeed Richard Bartholdt, had a large
          majority in St. Louis County.

          The Democrats elected their representatives in
          the Legislature from the Third District only, the
          successful candidates being J. J. Moroney, Charles
          Rizzo and Martin Ward.

          The Republicans elected three state senators and
          thirteen members of the House of Representatives.
          The election gives the Republicans of St. Louis
          sixteen votes in the General Assembly of the state.

          A. C. Wiget, Jr., defeated Maurice J. Cassidy, the
          Democratic incumbent from the Thirteenth District,
          in the State Senate.

          Four justices of the peace were elected by the
          Democrats--Edward Rice winning over Col. Dick
          Johnson in the Third District, Andrew Gazzolo and
          Rod Gorman being elected in the Fifth District, and
          James P. Miles winning in the Sixth District.

          George Grassmuck, Republican, defeated Andrew
          Scully, member of the House of Delegates, for
          justice of the peace in the Eighth District by a
          large plurality. W. D. Moore, Republican, defeated
          Robert J. Carroll, Democrat, in the Ninth District.

          Lawrence P. Daley, Democratic city committeeman in
          the Seventeenth Ward, was defeated for constable
          in the Fourth District. The Democrats elected only
          three constables. Daley led Turpin in the voting,
          but fell behind Floyd E. Bush, Republican, who was
          elected.

          Republican majorities were piled up in the
          First, Second, Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, Twelfth,
          Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Twenty-first wards.

          *       *       *       *       *

          VOTE ON LIQUOR ISSUE

          _Chicago Record-Herald_

          Richmond, Va., Sept. 22.--[Special.]--Virginia will
          join the other dry states Nov. 1, 1916, a majority
          of the voters of the state having cast their
          ballots to-day in favor of state-wide prohibition.
          Anti-liquor forces carried the election by not less
          than 25,000.

          The cities of Alexandria, Danville, Norfolk and
          Richmond were the only ones that gave a majority
          against state-wide prohibition. Richmond voted
          4,287 for prohibition and 6,011 against. The vote
          in the twenty cities of the state was 21,726 for
          and 19,699 against state-wide prohibition.

          Scattering returns from all the counties show heavy
          dry majorities.

          The surprise of the day was the vote in Petersburg,
          2,122 for state-wide prohibition and 1,123 against.
          The wets had figured on carrying that city as well
          as Newport News, which went dry by a vote of 1,024
          to 761.

          In Alexandria, the home of a large brewery, the
          vote was 387 for and 1,132 against. Bristol, which
          voted wet in the last local option election, voted
          424 to 282 for state-wide prohibition.

          Roanoke joined the dry column by a vote of 2,329
          for and 1,226 against, and the vote in Lynchburg
          was 1,713 for and 973 against.

          The counties of Amelia, Page and Greene are the
          only ones so far heard from that registered a wet
          majority.

          Ninety of the 100 counties voted dry in previous
          local option contests.

          The result of the election will cause the state to
          lose in revenue about $700,000 annually. It will
          cause all of the liquor manufacturing concerns
          to remove from the state. Only manufacturers at
          present engaged in the production of wine and its
          by-products, cider and beer, of not over 3½ per
          cent alcohol, can manufacture in this state after
          Nov. 1, 1916, and the product must be shipped
          outside the state and into territory where its sale
          is legally authorized.

          The day was a perfect one throughout the state. No
          disorder was reported in any town or county.




CHAPTER XI

LABOR TROUBLES AND STRIKES


Strikes, lock-outs, and similar labor troubles, as disturbances in the
economic life of the community, are of interest to many readers who are
not directly affected. Important issues of wide-spread interest, such
as the recognition of trades unions, the eight-hour day, and a living
wage, are often involved in labor disputes. Acts of violence committed
in connection with strikes have for the average reader the same kind of
interest as do other similar acts.

A fair and accurate presentation of the points of view of both the
employers and the employees is essential in all stories of this kind.
Statements from both sides, therefore, are important. Although stories
in this class are largely informative, there is also a chance for
human interest treatment. Accounts of living and working conditions,
for example, as obtained from workmen and their families often give
a better picture of the circumstances that produced the strike than
do formal statements by labor leaders. Sympathy may be legitimately
created for the strikers and their families, especially when they are
in actual want or are plainly the victims of oppression. Because the
settlement of labor troubles not infrequently is brought about by the
influence of public opinion, constructive journalism recognizes the
importance of furnishing readers with all of the facts necessary for an
intelligent understanding of the issues and conditions involved.

          *       *       *       *       *

          POSSIBILITY OF STRIKE

          _New York Herald_

          CHICAGO, Saturday.--Admissions were made
          on both sides to-night that the controversy between
          30,000 firemen operating on 150,000 miles of
          railroads West, Northwest and Southwest of Chicago,
          and the railroad managers, had become critical and
          that the question of a strike, tying up practically
          all systems between here and the Pacific coast,
          would be settled within forty-eight hours.

          W. S. Carter, president of the Brotherhood of
          Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen, on behalf of
          the firemen to-day sent to the General Managers’
          Committee of the railroads a request for a
          clear statement of the employers’ position. The
          brotherhood asked for information on three points
          in their demands: Increased wage scale, which the
          railroads say would amount to an increase of 22½
          per cent, but which the firemen say would equal
          only 12½ per cent; the right of the union to
          represent the fireman after he has been promoted
          either to an engineman or to any other capacity;
          the right of the union to have authority in
          questions of seniority or the promotion of old time
          employes.

          In previous negotiations the Brotherhood said that
          they were willing to submit the wage question to
          arbitration under the Erdman act, provided the
          other two points were settled without the aid of a
          third party.

          It was announced by the general managers’ committee
          to-night that an answer was directed sent to Mr.
          Carter, denying this request and leaving it to the
          union, despite their “strike vote,” to take what
          future course they think best. It is said that the
          recent vote, showing more than eighty per cent of
          the men to be against accepting the offer of the
          railroads, would enable the national officials to
          call a strike at any time.

          Negotiations have been on for six weeks. About
          forty-nine Western railroads are involved. If
          a strike were called, it is said, 25,000 other
          employes would be thrown out.

          *       *       *       *       *

          STRIKE

          _New York Evening Post_

          If you failed to find a red auto-cab on the street
          this morning, it was because the 475 drivers of the
          New York Taxicab Company had gone out on strike at
          five o’clock. At noon the strike was still on, the
          men, who are members of the Chauffeurs’ Protective
          Association, not having reached an agreement with
          the company.

          Most of the cabs are stored in the big Gospel
          Tent, next to the Y. M. C. A. building, on West
          Fifty-seventh Street, and if the company fails
          to get any of them moving by to-morrow, there is
          likely to be no room for the worshippers who attend
          the evangelistic services.

          So sudden was the action of the drivers that
          the company was totally unprepared to cope with
          the situation, and hundreds of orders remained
          unfilled. Many persons were disappointed during the
          day. At the offices, No. 546 Fifth Avenue, it was
          said no statement would be made, for the reason
          that the company did not know yet just where the
          trouble was.

          At Washington Hall, where the drivers established
          their headquarters, the officers of the association
          were in session nearly all morning, and out on the
          street in front of the building the members stood
          about in groups, waiting for an announcement as to
          the success or failure of their action. They did
          not hesitate to tell their grievances, either.

          “The whole question sizes up about like this,” said
          one of the be-goggled and helmeted chauffeurs. “The
          company expects the riding public to keep us alive
          on tips. But the riding public is losing the tip
          habit, if anybody should ask you, and it has been a
          starving game for us.

          “Now, we fellows have got to live, like any other
          workingmen. Just because we drive automobiles don’t
          prove that we’re all millionaires. We want a fair
          wage and opportunity to earn it. We don’t care how
          many hours we work, as long as there is a chance to
          make the money.

          “But we can’t do much under the present system.
          Here is the way the company proposes that we will
          make a living: We run the cabs for a week and take
          20 per cent. of the fares. Out of this we have to
          pay for all the gasolene we burn, the polish we use
          to keep the cabs bright and shiny, and two or three
          uniforms a year.

          “Supposing a driver takes in $20 a week? Out of
          that he would get 20 per cent., and out of that
          four dollars he is expected to pay for six or seven
          gallons of gasolene at fifteen cents a gallon,
          besides laying aside a clothing allowance and
          buying his polish. Of course, he is allowed to keep
          his tips, but tips are getting smaller every year.

          “Last week I made just seven dollars after all
          expenses had been deducted. I owed the company
          after the gasolene charges had been paid, and my
          tip money pulled me out seven to the good.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          BEGINNINGS OF STRIKE

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Five hundred employes of wholesale grocery houses
          yesterday joined the strike begun on the preceding
          day by the porters of Sprague, Warner & Co. Many
          nonunion men joined with the unionists, and in
          some of the houses the tie-up practically was
          complete. Boys and girls employed in the canning
          departments of some of the houses caught the strike
          fever and walked out with the men, although they
          are not organized. Two of the larger houses, those
          of Steele, Wedeles & Co. and Reid, Murdoch & Co.,
          escaped the strike yesterday, but their employes
          may go out to-day.

          The strike came as a sort of April fool joke on
          the merchants. They had offered to arbitrate the
          differences with the union, and did not believe
          that the men would obey a strike order. There has
          been no trouble in the industry for the last six
          years, and the merchants were inclined to believe
          that the entire controversy would be adjusted at a
          conference held yesterday morning. They found the
          union representatives firm in their demands for a
          fifty-four-hour week all the year.

          The merchants offered to grant a Saturday
          half-holiday for eight months, but insisted that
          while the fall rush was on in September, October,
          November and December the men would have to work
          full time. This was met by a proposition that they
          be paid time and one-half for the overtime on
          Saturday afternoons, but the merchants declared
          that would be an increase in wages which trade
          conditions did not warrant.

          Immediately after the negotiations were broken
          off the union officials hurried from one house
          to another and called out the men in most of the
          houses. A few of the older employes stuck to their
          posts, but the number was so small that they could
          not handle the business. Among the larger houses
          where the men went out are:

            FRANKLIN MACVEAGH & CO.
            SPRAGUE, WARNER & CO.
            W. M. HOYT COMPANY.
            JOHN A. TOLMAN & CO.
            HENRY HORNER & CO.
            W. J. QUAN & CO.
            S. PETERSON & CO.

          “We have a few men left at work,” said Rollin A.
          Keyes of Franklin MacVeagh & Co., “but I would
          not like to bet that we will have them to-morrow
          morning. They seem to have caught the strike fever,
          although I think our position is eminently fair.
          We made them as good a proposition as we believed
          the business would stand, and when that was not
          acceptable to them we offered to submit the entire
          matter of wages and hours to arbitration. They told
          us they had tried arbitration once and did not want
          any more of it. I cannot say how long the strike
          will last or how extensive it may be, but so far
          as this firm is concerned, we are always ready to
          meet our employes. I don’t see, however, that a
          conference will do any good at this time, as the
          strike will have to run its course.”

          Alex Gilchrist, business agent of the Wholesale
          Grocery Employes’ Union, declared that the demands
          of the men were conservative and that the offer to
          arbitrate was made too late in the negotiations to
          be taken up.

          “The merchants have had our demands before them for
          a month,” said Mr. Gilchrist, “and they offered
          us nothing until the last moment, when they knew
          we would strike. They are trying to break up our
          organization, and the men think that they might as
          well fight it out now. If the trade is so heavy
          during the fall months that they cannot grant us
          a half-holiday it is all the more reason why they
          should pay us overtime for Saturday afternoons
          during those months. Our men believe that they
          cannot get anything without fighting for it, and
          that is what we have decided to do.”

          The Freight Handlers’ Council will meet to-night
          and take up the strike of the grocery employes.
          A sympathetic strike in some of the railroad
          freighthouses is said to be probable unless the
          difficulty in the grocery houses is settled soon.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SERIOUS CLASH IN BIG STRIKE

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Trinidad, Colo., April 21.--[Special.]--Twenty-five
          dead, more than two-thirds of them women and
          children, a score missing, and more than a score
          wounded, is the toll known tonight to have resulted
          from the fourteen hour battle which raged
          yesterday between state troops and striking coal
          miners in the Ludlow district. The battle occurred
          on the property of the Colorado Fuel and Iron
          company, the Rockefeller holdings.

          Today both sides maintained an ominous quiet, but
          it is feared the battle will be resumed tomorrow
          with greater bloodshed than that which has occurred.

          The militia, which yesterday drove the strikers
          from their tent colony and, it is charged, set fire
          to the tents, involving thereby the greatest loss
          of lives, are preparing for a machine gun sortie
          at daybreak from their position along the Colorado
          and Southern railroad tracks at either side of the
          Ludlow station.

          On the surrounding hills, sheltered by rocks and
          bowlders, 400 strikers await the coming of the
          soldiers, while their ranks are being swelled by
          men who tramped overland in the dark, carrying guns
          and ammunition from the neighboring union camps.

          Italian, Greek, and Austrian miners have appealed
          to their consular representatives for protection,
          and John McLennan, president of the local union
          district, today wired the Red Cross in Denver to be
          prepared to render aid.

          Both strikers and militia have a plentiful supply
          of ammunition on hand. Five thousand rounds were
          taken to the troops at Ludlow on a Colorado and
          Southern train from Denver early this morning, and
          this supply was supplemented by a shipment from
          Trinidad this noon.

          The strikers by the seizure of an engine in the
          Denver and Rio Grande yards at Elmoro early
          yesterday were also able to replenish their stock.

          The militia number 200. Detachments from Walsenburg
          and Lamar got through the lines early yesterday.

          The fighting began early yesterday, when a militia
          detachment under Lieut. Linderfelt started to
          investigate the cause of firing near Cedar Hill.
          As the day progressed, word of the clash reached
          officials, and a relief expedition consisting of
          fifty members of the newly organized Trinidad
          militia company were sent to the scene on a
          special train. The militia went south of Ludlow
          and came upon the strikers barricaded in the
          pumping station.

          Maj. P. J. Hamrock, in a statement this morning,
          declared that the main battle was precipitated
          about dusk by a crowd of Greek strikers under Louis
          Tikas, who opened fire upon a detachment of his men
          while they were drilling near the military camp,
          and in sight of the tent colony.

          The strikers retreated along a gully back of the
          tent colony, followed by the militia, who swept the
          valley with machine guns.

          The fire of the troops set many of the tents on
          fire. While the flames were spreading several
          thousand rounds of ammunition stored in the tent
          of John Lawson, Colorado member of the national
          executive board, United Mine Workers, according to
          the military reports, was exploded.

          Terrified by the rain of bullets which poured
          through the blazing canvases above their heads,
          the women and children, apparently more afraid of
          the lead than of the flames, remained huddled in
          their pits until the smoke carried death to them by
          suffocation.

          When it appeared that no more men remained in the
          colony the militia ceased its fire and went to the
          work of rescue. Women ran from the burning tents,
          some with their clothing afire, carrying their
          babes in their arms. Many were forced to abandon
          their older children to their fate.

          Trembling, hysterical, some apparently dazed, the
          women were escorted by the troops to the Ludlow
          station, where they were held until this morning,
          when a Colorado Southern train brought them into
          Trinidad.

          The camp was abandoned to its fate following the
          departure of the women, and the strikers retreated
          to the arroyos back of the colony and to the
          surrounding hills.

          This morning the camp was a mass of charred
          débris. In the holes which had been dug for their
          protection against the rifle fire the women and
          children died like trapped rats when the flames
          swept over them. One pit, uncovered this afternoon,
          disclosed the bodies of ten children and two women.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ONE DAY OF BIG STRIKE

          _New York Times_

          (Condensed)

          LAWRENCE, Mass., Sept. 30.--For the first time
          in this country a “demonstration strike” against
          the imprisonment of labor leaders took place here
          to-day. After hand-to-hand fights between rioters
          and police, from the opening of the textile mill
          gates in the morning until the closing at night,
          the demonstration was called off by the Industrial
          Workers of the World.

          The strike was called for twenty-four hours,
          beginning this morning, in protest against the
          imprisonment of Joseph J. Ettor, Arturo Giovanitti,
          and Joseph Caruso, whose trial in connection
          with the death of Anna Lopizzo opened in Salem
          to-day. Seven thousand of the 30,000 operatives
          in the cotton and woolen mills here obeyed the
          call, forcing out 5,000 others, either through
          intimidation or lack of work because of closing
          down of departments. Then, at a mass meeting late
          this afternoon, the workers were told to go back
          to-morrow morning, ready to come out again at the
          call of the Industrial Workers, if the leaders
          should not be satisfied with the progress of the
          trial at Salem.

          The worst of the rioting occurred at the opening
          of the mill gates this morning. Pickets armed with
          revolvers, knives, sledge hammers, iron bolts and
          other weapons, attempted to stop operatives from
          going into the mills. When the police tried to
          maintain order, the pickets struggled with them
          desperately. Swinging their clubs with effect,
          the blue-coats drove back the rioters. A score of
          arrests were made, many of the prisoners having
          cracked heads, while there were many others who
          escaped through the crowds to their homes with
          bleeding heads and bruised faces.

          Men, women and children on their way to work were
          held up and assaulted by strikers or sympathizers.

          The morning’s trouble began at the corner of Essex
          and Mill Streets. A fireman was escorting his young
          daughter to her work in one of the mills when he
          was attacked by a crowd of pickets. The fireman
          put up a hard but successful fight to protect his
          daughter from interference. After seeing the young
          woman safely within the mill gates, he returned to
          the crowd of pickets. Here he pointed out a man,
          who, he said, had struck his daughter. The alleged
          assailant was arrested.

          A short time before the hour for opening the mills
          a stream of operatives began to pour down Essex
          Street and through the side streets leading to
          the factories. Pickets intercepted the workers
          and attempted to prevent them from entering the
          mill gates. Lunch baskets were snatched and hurled
          into the faces of the women and children. One gray
          haired woman was rescued, with two companions, from
          a group of pickets who had bruised her face.

          Fathers and brothers, some of them armed, escorted
          daughters and sisters to the mills. One boy was
          struck over the head with a bottle and rendered
          unconscious.

          Cars bearing workers were intercepted by pickets
          and stalled for a time. One motorman had to fight
          with the crowd for possession of his controller.

          Private automobiles were used as patrol wagons by
          the police. Timid women operatives were taken in
          charge by the police and conveyed by automobiles to
          their mills.

          Leaders of the Industrial Workers of the World said
          that the organization could not be held responsible
          for the disturbances. Miss Elizabeth Gurley Flynn
          in a statement said: “I, personally, and other
          leaders have constantly cautioned workers against
          any violence, particularly in the present strike,
          which is one of demonstration rather than of
          grievances. The trouble this morning was caused by
          some excitable youngsters, whose actions can hardly
          be controlled by any one.”

          Against this statement must be weighed the language
          of one of the addresses in Italian that aroused
          the crowd at the afternoon mass meeting. It was
          translated into English and given out to-night
          in the form of a statement by the speaker, Carlo
          Tresca, an editor of Pittsburgh. It said:

          “If Ettor, Giovanitti, and Caruso are found guilty,
          or either of them is found guilty, the Industrial
          Workers of the World will march to Salem, storm the
          jail, and rescue the prisoners, if possible.”

          Only one hospital case was reported, that of an
          operative who was thrown headlong from a street car
          and knocked unconscious. He was later discharged.
          No policeman was wounded, and no shots were fired.

          The decision of the Industrial Workers’ leaders
          to call off the strike was made public at a mass
          meeting attended by 5,000 persons in a vacant lot
          this afternoon. There was no dissent, although
          many of the operatives said they had expected the
          strike to last much longer. No vote was taken
          at the meeting on the matter of formally ending
          the strike. Archie Adamson, who presided, said
          afterward that the usual vote was dispensed with
          because it was feared some of the hotter heads
          among the strikers might insist upon remaining out,
          and thus create disturbances.




CHAPTER XII

WEATHER


The universal interest in the weather, which makes it the most common
topic of conversation, is due to its effect upon health, business,
and pleasure. Official forecasts of the weather are given a place
of prominence on the front page of most papers, and are read with
interest by most readers. The business man, the farmer, the shopper,
the pleasure-seeker, all are concerned with the state of the weather
and the predictions regarding it. Besides the official reports, there
is opportunity for weather stories of various kinds. The change of
the seasons, extremes of heat and cold, storms, and unusual weather
of any sort serve as subjects for weather stories. Two stories of an
eclipse of the sun have been included in this division, although, of
course, such phenomena should be classed as astronomical rather than
meteorological.

Although the purely informative type of story is the usual one for
weather, the subject may be treated in a lighter vein. There is often a
chance for life and color whether the treatment be informative or more
or less humorous.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FIRST WINTER WEATHER

          _Boston Transcript_

          Start up the furnace fire and begin the inroads on
          that well-stocked coal bin (if it is well stocked),
          for winter has come. The Old Man of the North put
          in appearance this morning, long enough to register
          officially at the Weather Bureau with a few flakes
          of snow. There was a welcome rainstorm during the
          night, and the snowflakes were just a tail-end
          contribution from the storm, a few raindrops turned
          into frozen particles when struck with the chill
          wind that blew in from the northwest.

          The forecast says: “Fair, continued cold tonight
          and Wednesday; freezing tonight.” The forecaster’s
          official verdict will be believed readily enough by
          all those who have been out during the day. When
          the temperature reading is only 41° in the middle
          of the day, as was the case today, it is a sure
          enough sign that winter is approaching, especially
          when a strong northwest wind is doing its best to
          find all the cracks and crevices in the buildings
          of the community, so that it will know where to
          locate them later in the year without wasting time
          in the search.

          It was colder at eleven o’clock this morning, by
          thirteen degrees, than it was at midnight, while
          the lowest temperature reading of the morning was
          between eight and nine o’clock, 39. That is not the
          lowest of the season, however, for nearly a month
          ago, Sept. 29 to be exact, there was a reading of
          34°. Forecaster Smith thinks that mark will be
          passed tonight; in fact, he would not be at all
          surprised if the minimum between now and tomorrow
          morning were around 28 to 30°. After tomorrow there
          will be a shift back to weather warmer than normal,
          or at least it looks so now.

          Today’s brand of weather is much nearer the normal
          than what the month of October has previously
          brought forth. Up to today there has been an
          accumulated excess of 156 degrees in heat, or an
          average of about six degrees a day.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SNOW STORM

          _Springfield Republican_

          Boisterous storms which broke over the whole
          eastern and southern quarters of the United States
          yesterday prepared the first “white Easter” this
          land has experienced in years. The snowy tumult
          swept in across the Atlantic from the south and
          east late Friday night and all day yesterday,
          bringing a considerable quantity of wet ocean with
          it, which was distributed high above tide levels
          along the whole sea coast from Maine to Florida,
          drowning out business in some cities and driving
          street car and automobile patrons to boats. Coastal
          shipping was paralyzed, rail traffic in many salt
          water districts was halted and wire lines were
          prostrated throughout the southern coast states.
          Louisiana and Texas saw the first scums of ice that
          have ever been frozen in those states in April.
          Hardy New England refused to be daunted by the
          large rough patches of “weather” flung down here.
          Rails and wires stood up well under the strain of
          blustery winds and snow ranging in depth from six
          inches to more than a foot. But the storm was no
          fun.

          All Western Massachusetts and Connecticut gasped
          and floundered yesterday afternoon and last night.
          The wind and flurries of snow presaging trouble
          were here before noon, but the real snowfall did
          not start until about 1 o’clock. Then a continuous
          fall with swirling gusts whisked through city
          streets and over country hills, drifting always
          where drifts were not desirable. Around Springfield
          the snow was about eight inches deep on the level
          and heavy drifts formed all over town. The
          railroads out of this city managed to keep within
          half an hour of schedule time, however.

          The snow was hardly soggy enough to put a serious
          crimp into traffic, and trains contrived to do
          their own drift-bucking, though the old reliable
          snowplows stood ready in the yards with dabs of
          axle grease on their snouts ready for quick calls
          to battle. Trolly lines about the city were open
          all afternoon and night, thanks to eight plows
          and a couple of sanders, with cars running as
          near schedule as possible. The Feeding Hills line
          was tied up two hours early in the evening when
          snow-choked switches refused to slide, and two cars
          were bounced off on the ground.

          All over town the going was treacherous enough to
          send many a smoothshod pedestrian to sudden and
          sometimes ignominious downfall. On one Main-street
          corner a perfectly respectable old gentleman went
          the “zip-bang!” route, as the sporting writers
          would have it, and startled passers-by with dark
          blue language when he spied his shiny Easter hat
          whiff hastily across the street and cave in against
          an adamant store front. On a busy corner at the
          evening rush hour, a swarthy, well-dressed young
          man went to the pavement all spraddled out, and
          tripped a woman with a potted lily in her arms. The
          lily pot collapsed with the well-known dull thud.
          The woman was outraged when the young man hopped
          up, looked frightened and dived into a nearby
          lunch-room, without a word. The manager of the
          lunch-room, who has to be an interpreter in order
          to hold his job, said that the swarthy, who was
          his assistant chef, had not tarried to apologize
          because he didn’t know how to do it in English.

          When the snow began to fall in the afternoon, the
          street department made a few desultory attempts
          with sweepers to keep it confined to the gutters,
          but the storm became too persistent for that.
          Drifts filled the crossings in spite of gangs of
          shovelers and traffic of all sorts was enfeebled
          though not halted. Traffic officers and drivers
          were blinded by the fine flurries at times and
          the police consider the day a lucky one because
          only one slight crash occurred. Harry Edwards,
          driving N. L. Byron’s undertaking car, failed to
          see the warning palm of the officer at the corner
          of Main and State streets soon enough, and with
          wheels locked his machine skidded into a broadside
          collision with a Fiberloid company’s truck. The
          Byron car came off with a crushed fender and a few
          scratches.

          Easter week business in hats and Sunday trumpery
          was badly handicapped. The storm yesterday did all
          the crimping left undone by the trolly strike,
          which kept folks at home Wednesday and Thursday; so
          that practically all of the downtown store owners
          admitted last night that their week’s business was
          ruined. The Forbes & Wallace, the Steiger, the
          Kinsman-Campbell and a few other of the larger
          store managements were irked at the sight of their
          sales staffs standing around idle last night, and
          closed a half-hour early. The flower stores, too,
          were badly hit by the storm, some of them having
          perishable stocks left on their hands last night,
          which will have to spoil for want of a market.

          The weather conditions yesterday caused a big
          rush of business for the telephone company, extra
          girls being called in and kept going at top speed
          all day. During the rush hours the service was
          especially heavy, being about double that of an
          ordinary day, and the exchange boards were a blaze
          of lights. In spite of the demand the company
          responded well, giving fine service. Ordinarily
          about 110,000 local calls are handled each day,
          but the number went far in excess of that figure
          yesterday. But in spite of all there were large
          feelings of thankfulness in many bosoms yesterday
          when the street cars were observed going about
          their regular business. Had the trollymen’s strike
          not been called off Thursday evening, the city
          would have been utterly paralyzed. The strike
          occurred on two days when the weather was fine.
          Apparently the gods did a little charitable
          figuring before the week’s program was arranged.

          However much people may have been surprised by
          April snow, yesterday’s fall was not unprecedented.
          Springfield has been almost snowed under several
          times during the month of April, light falls having
          been seen here frequently. A few of the heaviest
          snows recorded were as follows:--

            April 19, 1821, two feet.

            April 6, 1852, tremendous storm. Snow a foot deep
            on the level.

            April 17, 1854, heavy storm, with two-foot drifts
            and good sleighing.

            April 3, 1861, deep drifts, traffic suspended.

            April 2, 1862, over a foot of snow.

            April 7, 1868, seven inches of snow.

            April 1, 1872, a six-inch fall.

            April 25 and 26, 1874, severe storm with 18-inches
            of snow.

            April 5, 1876, heaviest snowstorm of the winter,
            two feet on the level.

            April 8 and 9, 1907, about seven inches on the
            level.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FIRST DAYS OF SPRING

          _New York Herald_

          Central Park was filled yesterday with throngs of
          visitors out to enjoy the balmy air of a spring
          day. Automobiles, victorias and other smart
          equipages passed in continuous procession along the
          drives. Fifth avenue stages unloaded hundreds who
          streamed through the park and joined the throng
          already there. The new life of springtime was
          manifest on every side.

          In mid-afternoon, under the warming influence of
          the sun, couples seated on the benches began boldly
          to hold hands. The Mall was peopled by thousands
          who walked or travelled on cars from all parts of
          the city. There were long rows of family parties.
          At every avenue of approach were venders of
          balloons and whirligigs displaying their wares to
          children.

          The space on the walks not covered by pedestrians
          was taken up by perambulators and go-carts. Even
          the squirrels seemed to be surprised by the
          outpouring of visitors and the increase in the
          peanut supply.

          Boats splashed in the lakes and streams bearing
          happy couples and shouting, happy faced youngsters.
          Along the railings overlooking the bridle paths
          stood thousands watching the smartly dressed
          equestrians gallop by.

          The menagerie was the magnet that drew and held the
          largest crowds; fully fifty thousand viewed the
          animals. For the first time many of them saw the
          new members of the zoological family that arrived
          during the winter. James Conway, the veteran
          shepherd of the park flocks, had twenty brand new
          lambs to show, and it was with a great sense of
          pride that he displayed them upon the hillside.
          In addition to a new staff he had at his side the
          beautiful collie Jack, recently presented to him by
          Mr. J. Pierpont Morgan.

          Warmed by a soft breeze from the south, Coney
          Island had a spring festival. Fifty thousand
          persons, responding to the invitation of the vernal
          equinox, spent the afternoon at the resort by the
          sea. The Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company had to put
          on extra trains. Automobiles were out in great
          number.

          Coney Island has awakened from its winter sleep
          earlier than usual this season. The roller coaster
          railways and many merry-go-rounds already open were
          augmented yesterday by the opening of the “loop
          the loop.” The horse race feature of Steeplechase
          Park will open next Sunday, and the whole park will
          begin its season on the following Sunday.

          Dreamland Park will open on May 14. Work of getting
          the park in shape will begin this week. Luna Park
          will open, as usual, about the first week of
          May. It was reported yesterday that a well known
          Manhattan restaurateur will open an establishment
          next month adjoining the New Brighton Theatre.

          Isaac Stein, a merchant in Surf avenue, Coney
          Island, asserts that he is the first man to don
          a straw hat for the 1910 season. He put one on
          yesterday and sat for two hours on his porch.

          *       *       *       *       *

          COLD SUMMER WEATHER

          _New York Evening Post_

          June has carried off the year’s honors in weather
          record-breaking, with the cold winds of last night
          and to-day. At six o’clock this morning the Weather
          Bureau’s thermometer registered 48 degrees. Since
          1871, when the tabulations of the Weather Bureau
          began, no such temperature has been noted after
          June 9. There have been one or two days of chillier
          weather in past Junes, with 45 degrees as the
          record for low temperature, but none of these have
          come so late in the month.

          New Yorkers who woke up in the cold June dawn
          and went groping into bottoms of trunks for the
          blankets of January may take some malicious
          pleasure in the fact that it was colder in some
          places in the State. The most uncomfortable
          community in New York appears to have been Camden,
          in the north, near the St. Lawrence, where the
          mercury slid down to 36 degrees. Rochester was
          in little better condition, with a frigid summer
          morning’s air at 40 degrees, and Syracuse shivered
          over its cereal and cream in a hardly more cheerful
          atmosphere at 42 degrees. A prevailing, if not
          popular, temperature in many places was 44 degrees,
          which chilled Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo, and
          Scranton, Pa. Over the line in Vermont, Northfield
          was delighting in a temperature of 40 degrees.

          The explanation of all these rare days in June
          for those who are not content with knowing that
          it is too cold for comfort at this time of year,
          is that there has been an area of high barometric
          pressure hovering around the Canadian Northwest
          recently, and that it has been moving eastward and
          down over a part of the United States on its way
          out to sea. Everywhere it has been accompanied by
          drops in temperature of from 14 to 20 degrees,
          so that New York is no worse off than any other
          State. Yesterday this area was over northern
          Minnesota, and last night it was over Lake Huron.
          It is still with us in New York, and is likely to
          be with us to-night, the weather experts say, so
          that housewives may as well keep their blankets on
          the beds, now that they are out. Just how far the
          thermometer may drop to-night cannot be predicted.
          The weather man thinks there may be frost in the
          country districts to-night.

          A serious side to the prospect of frost is the
          danger of damage to fruit trees and gardens.
          Last night, fortunately, frosts were prevented by
          the rain which fell early in the night and which
          left the trees and crops safe as the sky cleared
          later. Tonight, however, different conditions are
          to be faced and farmers will have to protect their
          produce as far as they can. There were damaging
          frosts on one or two of the cold nights of last
          week.

          So far there has been an interesting weather
          contest between months this year. May furnished
          the hottest weather on its 26th and 27th that
          had been recorded for that month in 34 years,
          with temperatures of 89 and 91 degrees. June has
          outclassed May and made it impossible for any other
          month to better her record, by outdoing all known
          feats. With to-morrow, June 21, the summer solstice
          and the longest day of the year, the official
          beginning of the supposedly hot season is expected
          to usher in a period of normally settled weather.

          *       *       *       *       *

          HIGH WIND

          _New York Times_

          Wind, which seemed never to be of remarkable
          velocity, but which blew in gusts that whipped a
          fine rain into stinging particles, blinding to
          pedestrians and to drivers of vehicles, caused
          the death of two men yesterday and injury to many
          others, and did damage to property in Manhattan
          and Brooklyn that threatened many other lives. One
          of the victims of the storm was run down by an
          automobile; the other was blown into the bay and
          drowned.

          A derrick was blown from a six-story building
          and fell into the roof of a moving-picture house
          adjoining, four stories below. In Brooklyn, the
          front wall, 100 feet long, of a grain elevator
          crashed into the street, and the spire of St.
          Paul’s Roman Catholic Church was partly blown to
          pieces.

          It was in Columbia Street, between Pacific and
          Amity Streets, Brooklyn, that the greatest damage
          was done. There are the buildings of the Dow
          Stores and Grain Elevator Company. One of the
          buildings, more than 80 feet in height, runs for
          100 feet along Columbia Street. Its front wall was
          of brick, windowless and blank above the street
          floor. Behind it ran wooden bins, in which grain
          was stored, and between it and the bins were no
          cross-beams or supports. It was this that fell.

          Tons of brick crashed into the street just after 8
          o’clock, carrying down the trolley poles and lines
          of the crosstown line of surface cars and smashing
          against the walls opposite. Like the wrecked
          building, however, these were storehouses and
          factories, and little damage was done to them.

          The roar of the falling wall sounded like an
          explosion, and Policeman Guthrie of the Amity
          Street Station and the crowd which rushed to
          Columbia Street thought a bomb had been exploded.
          The whole wall, 100 feet long, had fallen into the
          street from the roof to a point twenty feet above
          the sidewalk.

          John Snackenberg, an Inspector in the Building
          Department, said that grain stored in the building
          might have exploded by spontaneous combustion or
          the accumulation of years which had dropped between
          the bins and the outer wall might have swollen and
          forced the brick wall out. He would not say that
          either of these things had happened, however, and
          it was generally believed that the wind had started
          the wall swaying until it had toppled over.

          John Callahan and his three-year-old son, John,
          Jr., were on their way home to 81 Congress Street
          when the wall fell, and they were cut and bruised
          by bricks. John Sullivan of 100 Baltic Street was
          hurt in the same way, and all were treated by Dr.
          Lee of the Long Island College Hospital.

          The crowds returning to their homes from the
          place were warned away from the corner of Court
          and Congress Street. There a big piece of copper
          about fifty feet long was swaying from the tip of
          St. Paul’s spire. The church, which is the oldest
          Catholic Church in Brooklyn, since the renovation
          of St. James’s Pro-Cathedral, in Jay Street, has a
          spire covered with slate and protected along the
          edges with strips of copper.

          The wind detached one of these, twenty-five feet
          long, and blew it across the street to the roof of
          a tenement at 196 Court Street, where it smashed
          through the skylight and put the tenants in a
          panic, though none was hurt. The second strip, only
          partly detached, blew to and fro like the pendulum
          of a huge clock, occasionally knocking pieces of
          slate into the street as it banged against the
          spire. The police blocked off the corner with red
          lanterns and prevented pedestrians or vehicles from
          passing.

          In Manhattan the wind blew a 300-pound derrick
          from the roof of a six-story building at 801 Third
          Avenue, near Fiftieth Street. It fell on the roof
          of the two-story building adjoining, and the crash
          startled the 200 occupants of a moving picture
          house on the floor beneath. They hustled for
          the doors, and women’s dresses were torn in the
          struggle. None was hurt, however.

          James Costello, a retired policeman and special
          watchman in a bank in Williams Street, and Charles
          Smith, employed on a barge moored to the end of
          Long Dock, in Erie Basin, were the storm’s victims.
          Costello was run down by an automobile in front of
          7,210 Fourteenth Avenue, Brooklyn, when he tried
          to cross the street, his vision shielded by an
          umbrella, which the wind forced him to hold over
          his face.

          Smith, with Edward Jurgeson, was crossing on a
          plank between the end of the pier and his barge
          when a gust of wind blew him off. Jurgeson
          stretched out a hand and caught Smith’s arm. He
          could not hold him and was pulled into the water.
          Other bargemen, hearing them yell, threw ropes, and
          Jurgeson caught one. He was hauled into the barge,
          but Smith was lost. His body was recovered.

          Three fourteen-year-old boys were hurt in Paterson,
          N. J., when the wind blew down a barn at 80 Plum
          Street, in which they had taken refuge from the
          rain. They were Louis Krager of 6, Frank Carman of
          71, and Louis Rose of 34 Plum Street.

          The boys were buried in the wreckage of the
          building until firemen dug them out. Then it was
          found that Krager had his right arm and left leg
          broken and both the others probably had fractured
          skulls. Young Krager was caught beneath several
          heavy beams and could not be moved until firemen
          had rigged a block and falls and lifted the beams.
          The youngsters were taken to St. Joseph’s Hospital.

          According to the weather forecast, the wind, which
          blew from the northeast yesterday, will haul to the
          northwest to-day, and may blow even more heavily.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_In the next two stories the facts about the
          same eclipse are given in different ways._

          ECLIPSE OF SUN

          (1)

          _Washington Herald_

          That feeling of awe inspired by the shutting off
          of the sun’s light was prevalent in Washington
          yesterday morning for about three hours.

          All over the city groups of men, women, and
          children were formed to view the phenomenon through
          smoked glasses. Those who had not been informed of
          the eclipse, or who had neglected to ascertain the
          time of the sun’s darkening, mistook the appearance
          of things as foreboding rain.

          The darkness was not like the darkness of night. It
          was a gloomy blackness, and seemed to carry a chill
          with it as it passed over the earth.

          At the Naval Observatory, on Georgetown Heights, a
          corps of five astronomers were making observations
          of the spectacle, and photographs were taken by a
          forty-foot photo-heliograph.

          Under the direction of Prof. W. S. Eichelberger,
          the observers recorded the first contact of the sun
          and moon at thirty-five minutes and twenty-eight
          seconds after 9 o’clock, just ten seconds before
          the predicted time. The sun was in partial eclipse
          until forty-nine minutes and two seconds after 12
          o’clock.

          Photographs were taken at different intervals of
          the moon’s transit by Prof. George H. Peters.
          Those who assisted in making the observations were
          Profs. F. B. Littell and G. A. Hill, assistant
          astronomers, Mat Frederickson and C. W. Frederick.

          According to the astronomers, only about 75 per
          cent of the sun’s face was darkened, but the
          eclipse was total in Florida and Mexico.

          This was the second eclipse of the year, the other
          having occurred on January 3. As the sun yesterday
          was not completely hidden, the phenomenon of the
          “corona” was not visible. The shadow was visible,
          however, over the whole of North America, the
          northern portion of South America, the southwestern
          part of Europe, the northwest corner of Africa, and
          the Northern Atlantic and Pacific oceans.

          The spectacle was regarded by astronomers at the
          observatory as highly instructive, many crescent
          images being seen.

          Last evening, immediately after sunset, Jupiter,
          Mercury, Mars, Neptune, and Venus were noticeable,
          grouped together in the West. These stars,
          according to astronomers, will not be seen again in
          such proximity for several hundred years.

          In other days, the combination of two such
          phenomena, the grouping of large planets, and
          an eclipse of the sun, would start all sorts
          of forebodings, but with the general spread of
          astronomical knowledge, events like these are
          accepted as part of the workings of the great law
          that rules the universe, and have ceased to strike
          terror.

          *       *       *       *       *

          (2)

          _Washington Post_

          Sooty nose tips were quite the fashion in the
          National Capital yesterday forenoon. People got
          them by squinting through bits of smoked glass at
          the sun and moon. Our Lady of the Night, instead of
          being decently abed with her star children in the
          celestial nursery, was up and abroad in the full
          glare of the June morning, and had the astronomical
          rudeness to cast a shadow on Sabbath newspapers by
          passing between their readers and the light.

          It took her 3 hours, 13 minutes, and 34 seconds, to
          a dot, to march across the sun, and all Washington
          flocked into the front yard to gaze on the lady’s
          transit. They bore gingerly in their fingers small
          pieces of glass darkened by wick smoke, and such
          as in their innocence yielded to the promptings
          of mischief-minded folk to “Hold it closer, dear,
          closer, so you can see,” reaped the reward of the
          unsophisticated in smudged noses and gay shouts of
          ribaldry at their cost.

          It was 35 minutes and 28 seconds past 9 o’clock,
          standard time, when the partial eclipse began.
          At that instant occurred what astronomers call
          the first contact, when the windward edge of
          the roistering moon impinged on the sun’s
          periphery. Get it? Periphery--circumference--rim.
          (Representing the difference between the Naval
          Observatory, Connecticut avenue and South
          Washington. All the same, but seconds different.)

          It was 1 hour 36 minutes and 47 seconds later, or
          11:12:15 a. m., when the Pale Orb of Night (phrase
          borrowed) reached the half-way point in her morning
          stroll across the perpendicular path of the light
          dispenser, and achieved the casting of a shadow
          on the world that, if it didn’t send the birds to
          roost, at least fooled some lazy folk into turning
          over with a happy sigh of surprise for a longer
          snooze.

          It was 29 minutes and 2 seconds past the hour
          of high noon when her ladyship blew off to bed,
          scandalous jade, and the smoked-glass gazers went
          to lunch.

          At the Naval Observatory, on Wisconsin avenue
          Heights, during the eclipse Prof. W. S.
          Eichelberger and his full staff were as busy as 97
          eggs in an incubator at hatching time.

          “The eclipse,” added the professor, “arrived ten
          seconds ahead of the predicted time and lasted
          thirteen seconds less than the predicted period.
          Five observers noted the times of contact--Prof.
          F. B. Littell, U. S. N., Assistant Astronomers
          G. A. Hill, J. C. Hammond, Matt Frederickson,
          C. W. Frederick, and myself--who directed the
          observations. A photograph of the maximum eclipse
          was taken by Assistant George H. Peters, and a
          print was obtained through the courtesy of Capt.
          W. J. Barnett, U. S. N., superintendent of the
          observatory.

          “The photograph was taken with the 40-foot
          photoheliograph installed at the observatory. All
          other official observations were made by equatorial
          telescopes. The day was fine for observations.
          The image of the sun was very steady at the first
          contact, but somewhat less steady at the last.”

          The photoheliograph is a photographic camera, forty
          feet long, mounted horizontally. Within two feet of
          the front end of the forty-foot tube (or bellows,
          to borrow a photographical term) is the telescope
          lens. Two feet in front of it is a wedge-shaped
          piece of unsilvered glass, called the mirror. This
          mirror receives the sun’s rays direct, diverts the
          major portion of the light, and reflects the small
          remainder upon the lens, which in turn imprints the
          image upon the sensitive plate at the near end of
          the tube.

          This near end--earth end, it might be called--is
          inserted in one wall of a square, dark room, within
          which the photographer stands. A vertical slit,
          one-sixteenth of an inch wide, in the near end
          of the tube, admits the light from the lens. At
          the precise moment the photographer, by a quick,
          strong pull on a lever, shoots the sensitive
          plate across this slit, thereby accomplishing an
          “exposure” of about one one-hundredth of a second
          in duration. In that infinitesimal fraction of time
          the desired image of the eclipse is--and yesterday
          was--imprinted upon the photographer’s plate.

          In case of a total eclipse the operation is
          different. On account of the complete obscuration
          of the luminary by the moon, a time exposure of
          about two minutes is required, and to achieve this
          a clock mechanism turns the camera tube so as to
          keep the heavenly object always centered on the
          lens.

          The diameter of the sun is 800,000 miles. The
          diameter of the moon is 4,000 miles. But the sun
          is 92,500,000 miles away from the earth, and the
          moon is only 24,000 miles away. So, upon the ocular
          principle that the nearer an object is the bigger
          it looks, the moon, when it passed between the sun
          and the earth yesterday, had an apparent diameter
          as great as the actual diameter of the sun. That
          is why, when there is a total eclipse, the moon
          is big enough, looked at from the earth, to all
          but completely hide the sun, though the sun is 200
          times as large as the moon. Otherwise there could
          not be such a thing as a total eclipse.

          So yesterday in Florida and Mexico, where the
          eclipse was central, at the moment of the maximum
          eclipse all that the people could see of the sun
          was a brilliant ring around the circumference of
          the moon, like a molten circlet.




CHAPTER XIII

SPORTS


=Interest in sports.= One of the marked characteristics of
American newspapers is the large amount of space, both absolutely
and relatively, that they devote in every issue to news of sports.
Although there is undoubtedly a healthy interest in athletic contests
on the part of many readers, newspapers have greatly stimulated this
interest and have created a considerable part of the present demand for
sporting news and gossip. Hundreds of thousands of newspaper readers
who have never seen a major league baseball game follow day by day the
doings of the various teams and players, not merely during the playing
season but throughout the greater part of the year. Newspapers have
also assisted in developing intercollegiate football from a game in
which students and alumni were primarily interested into a sport of big
spectacular contests that attract the general public. Even after prize
fighting was barred in most states, newspapers, by the space given to
the contestants for months before every fight, were able to maintain
wide-spread interest in the results. In order to furnish readers with
a very large amount of reading matter concerning both major and minor
sports, most papers have a special staff of sports writers under the
direction of the sporting editor.

=Type of story.= Sporting news stories may be divided into three
classes: (1) those that deal with the contestants and the conditions
before the event, (2) those that report the contest itself, and (3)
those that analyze the event and its results. Stories that discuss
the relative merits of the contestants and forecast the results of
the game are based on first hand observations of the writer or on the
observations of others, regarding the showing made by the contestants
in previous events and in practice. The general and the detailed
accounts of a contest can, of course, be written only by writers who
have witnessed it. The analysis of the event and of its results may
be based either on the reporter’s own observations of the contest
or on the reports of it printed in newspapers. In covering a big
sporting event, a newspaper frequently assigns two men to report it,
one to write a general account and one a detailed story. It is evident
that all sporting news stories can best be written by men who are
thoroughly familiar with the sport itself and with the contestants.

=Purpose.= The general aim of sporting news stories should be
to satisfy a normal, healthy interest in legitimate sports. That
newspapers have stimulated an excessive interest in professional
baseball and intercollegiate football, as well as in prize fights,
is a criticism deserving careful consideration. The evil effects
on schoolboy athletes, and even on some college players, of undue
newspaper publicity have been pointed out by educators and should also
be considered by the sports writer. Accuracy and fairness are as vital
to news stories of sports as to any other news stories. Although the
interest that readers have in local contestants may warrant a writer
in devoting considerable space to them, it does not justify him in
slighting or treating unfairly their opponents in whom the readers have
less interest. The spirit of fair play that is essential to sport is
equally necessary to reports of sporting events.

=Treatment.= The handling of sporting news presents several
problems. The review of conditions preceding the contest and the
analysis of the game and its results require careful observation, clear
thinking, and a good expository style. In some respects this kind
of interpretation is not unlike editorial and critical writing. The
account of the event itself demands spirited narrative and description
that portrays not only the scenes but the spirit of the occasion.
The contrast between the emotions of the victors and those of the
vanquished may be used to good advantage. Because of the popular
interest in individual players, many events give ample opportunity for
developing the personal, or human interest, elements. The term “heroes”
as often applied to athletes is not inappropriate, for it is the heroic
qualities of the contestants that appeal to the spectators and the
followers of the sport.

Style is also an important element in sporting news stories. The
very popularity of a subject that demands much writing on the same
or similar material day by day necessitates variety of presentation.
Efforts to avoid constant repetition in reporting baseball games
have resulted in some picturesque diction and some original figures
of speech in the stories of the clever few, and in much more cheap
humor and almost unintelligible jargon in the work of their mediocre
imitators. That readable stories can be written in good English with as
much originality of style as is to be found in other well written news
stories, has been repeatedly demonstrated by a number of writers on
sports.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FOOTBALL TEAM PROSPECTS

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          When the University of Pennsylvania football
          eleven lines up for its game with the Navy team
          tomorrow afternoon on Severn Field it will in all
          probability be without the services of three of its
          star backfield men. Howard Berry, “Bill” Quigley
          and “Vic” Welch are the trio who will be forced to
          witness this contest from the sidelines. Berry,
          who was injured the early part of last week, has
          been unable to get into any of the scrimmages this
          week, while Quigley and Welch have been out of
          the game since last Saturday, when both received
          injuries which will very likely keep them out of
          the contest, unless it is absolutely necessary to
          call on them for active service.

          The loss of these three men will prove a serious
          loss to the Red and Blue, and unless the men
          who are sent in to take their places can gain
          through the Middies’ defense, “Old Penn” will be
          in a serious predicament. The result of the game
          tomorrow afternoon will be very closely followed
          by all of Penn’s coming opponents on the gridiron
          this fall; and unless the Quakers can come close to
          the score made by the Pittsburgh team last Saturday
          against the Admirals, the chances for defeating the
          Smoky City athletes are very slim.

          Yesterday’s workout in the rain did not slow up the
          practice a great deal, as the men put all of their
          energies into their play, and if the same spirit is
          prevalent in tomorrow’s game the Red and Blue team
          should bring victory to Philadelphia. Ray Grant,
          who has been directing the team during the last two
          days, will in all probability be first choice for
          the quarterback position, with Williams, Ross and
          Derr behind him.

          In the workout yesterday these four men gained
          consistently against the freshman and scrub
          elevens, and all of the coaches were well pleased
          with the scrimmage work of the men. In the freshman
          contest the Varsity went over for a touchdown in
          20 minutes of play, and in the scrub game they
          shoved the pigskin for another tally. Tackling was
          practiced, and every man was given the “call” if
          he did not down the runner in the proper manner.
          This department of the game will be drilled into
          the head of every man, and before the season is far
          advanced there should be a vast improvement in the
          tackling of every Penn player.

          At the close of today’s practice the men will go
          to the training house for dinner, after which they
          will pack their grips for Annapolis. The squad will
          not go direct to Annapolis tonight, but will stay
          in Baltimore. The team’s headquarters overnight
          will be the Hotel Belvidere. Saturday morning the
          men will board cars for the Naval Academy. Coaches
          “By” Dickson, Torrey, Wharton and Dr. Carl Williams
          will in all probability take the trip with the team.

          That the students at the University are interested
          in the outcome of this contest is certain, for
          tomorrow morning a “Pennsylvania special” will pull
          out of Philadelphia with more than 150 Penn rooters
          on board. There are certain to be some lively
          times on the Navy field tomorrow afternoon, when
          the rooters cheer their teams on the banks of the
          historic Severn River.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The two stories following, although
          taken from the same paper and dealing with similar
          material, afford an interesting contrast._

          THE DAY OF THE GAME

          _New York Evening Post_

          PRINCETON, N. J., November 6.--With ideal
          football weather for the annual game between
          Princeton and Harvard to-day, the thousands of
          followers of the rival teams who are here from all
          sections of the East expect to witness one of the
          most spectacular struggles of the season. The Tiger
          coaches consider their eleven 20 per cent. stronger
          than when Dartmouth was defeated two weeks ago, and
          while not over-confident, are hopeful of victory.
          There are many in the Princeton camp who say it
          is the first time in four years that the Orange
          and Black have entered into battle with Harvard on
          apparently even terms.

          Although the unbeaten Princeton team appear to have
          the better of Harvard in playing form and all-round
          strength, it is realized that in the Crimson,
          defeated by Cornell two weeks ago, there are great
          possibilities, and that Rush’s men will have the
          battle of their careers if victory is to be theirs.
          With the exception of Halsey, right tackle, who
          was injured last week, the Tigers are in prime
          condition and prepared for a gruelling contest.
          Parisette, who replaces Halsey, and Lamberton, who
          takes Brown’s place at right end, are the only
          changes announced by Coach Rush. The remainder of
          the team is the same that started the Dartmouth
          contest. Lamberton until recently was a substitute
          halfback. The changes are believed to have
          materially strengthened the Princeton combination
          at its weakest point.

          Harvard will present a team on edge for the battle,
          and, with the remarkable open-field running of
          Capt. Mahan, hopes to carry away the honors. The
          Crimson, however, is to face a much stronger
          opponent than it did last year, when Princeton was
          defeated 20 to 0. Neither of the rival coaches will
          make any predictions prior to the start of the
          game; both are hopeful, however, and say their men
          will fight to the last ditch.

          The largest crowd that ever saw a Harvard-Princeton
          game in this little town is on hand to see the
          fray. The demand for tickets was so great that
          the supply of 41,000 was exhausted. It was the
          usual colorful crowd, bedecked with the crimson of
          Harvard and the yellow and black of the Tigers,
          that wended its way from the special trains from
          New York and Philadelphia early to-day to Palmer
          Stadium. Automobiles by the hundreds brought
          thousands of spectators. Old Princeton graduates,
          back for the annual game, held impromptu reunions
          on the campus or on Nassau Street, or made a tour
          of inspection of the University buildings to note
          the changes since they were last here.

          The Cambridge players came in from New York on a
          special during the morning, and were given a great
          welcome by hundreds of Harvard men who had preceded
          the squad here. Members of the scrub elevens of
          the two institutions who have worked hard all
          season giving practice to their respective ’varsity
          teams played a game in the forenoon which attracted
          a big crowd.

          The lineup will be as follows:

              PRINCETON.            HARVARD.

            Highley, l. e.        Soucy, l. e.
            McLean, l. t.         Gilman, l. t.
            Nourse, l. g.         Dadmun, l. g.
            Gennert, c.           Wallace, c.
            Hogg, r. g.           Taylor, r. g.
            Parisette, r. t.      Parson, r. t.
            Lamberton, r. e.      Harte, r. e.
            Glick (c), qb.        Watson, qb.
            Shea, l. hb.          King, l. hb.
            Tibbott, r. hb.       Boles, r. hb.
            Driggs, fb.           Mahan (c), fb.

          Officials: Referee, W. S. Langford, Trinity;
          umpire, Dr. Carl Williams, Pennsylvania; field
          judge, E. S. Land, Annapolis; head linesman, G. N.
          Bankart, Dartmouth. Time of periods fifteen minutes
          each.

          Game starts 2 P. M.

          *       *       *       *       *

          THE DAY OF THE GAME

          _New York Evening Post_

          BY FAIR PLAY.

          CAMBRIDGE, November 7.--Brave north-west
          winds, a blue sky with heavy clouds drifting
          across, sunlight with a glint of steel in it, and
          air with a tang, were the weather conditions which
          added zest to the spirit with which Cambridge
          greeted the day of her big game of the season, the
          contest for gridiron supremacy between the Harvard
          and Princeton football elevens. The game with Yale
          will be played two weeks hence at New Haven, and
          as a consequence Nassau takes Eli’s place in the
          Cantabrigian scheme of things.

          Enthusiasm is keen both here and in Boston; for
          since the Crimson and Orange and Black resumed
          football relations in 1911, after a lapse of
          fifteen years, interest in this annual struggle has
          increased in the public mind, as in the estimation
          of adherents of the rival universities, until now
          it has taken a place among the gridiron classics of
          the year.

          The fact that of all the important university
          elevens Harvard and Princeton are the only two that
          have not met defeat this season is taken into
          account as emphasizing the importance of the game,
          there being something of a supplemental thrill in
          the probability that by five o’clock this afternoon
          the record of two unbeaten elevens will be reduced
          to one.

          A striking note about Cambridge to-day is the
          absence of Crimson banners in the hands of Harvard
          enthusiasts. Red flags are barred under the
          law, and the Socialists have insisted upon the
          enforcement of the ordinance. No one is permitted
          to carry the colors of fair Harvard, under pain
          of arrest, and, while there was a tendency on the
          part of certain indignant students and alumni to
          make a test of the law which, by the way, was
          aimed at anarchists and militant Socialists, the
          Harvard authorities deemed it unwise thus to force
          the issue. So a formal request was issued by the
          management that Harvard’s arterial red be not borne
          to-day. This is said to apply, also, to arm-bands
          and to handkerchiefs, which will defeat the ancient
          Harvard custom of the Cambridge cheering section
          forming a red-and-white H. An attempt will be
          made to have the law amended, so as to exempt the
          University from its provisions, which afflict
          Harvard so grievously at present.

          The whole thing is ridiculous, absurd; but the law
          stands, and it has to be obeyed. In the meantime
          there appears to be no objection to red carnations
          and American beauty roses, nor even to red neckties
          or hosiery. Just the same, the Harvard stands are
          likely to be more sombre this afternoon than is
          usual when big games are played in the stadium.
          There is no ban, however, upon the orange and the
          black, and so, Princetonians, of whom there will
          be several thousands inside the gray walls of the
          arena on the River Charles, may be as garish as
          they please.

          Cambridge was overlaid with gold to-day, not the
          gold of Old Nassau, but nature’s purest sunlight.
          It rested on old buildings of the yard, flooded
          the streets, and tipped the tiny wavelets of the
          Charles with silver. No day better qualified for
          football at its best ever smiled upon this old
          university seat. On the inspiring breeze was borne
          the odor of burnt leaves and of wood smoke; the
          call of the great out of doors was too potent for
          even the most dry-as-dust professor to resist.

          Every one was out early; every one was talking
          football. Concrete point to the excitement
          developed shortly after noon when the graduates and
          students began to assemble for their parade through
          the University and thence to the field. The alumni
          representing classes as far back as the sixties,
          and coming down to the class of 1913, met in front
          of University Hall, the seniors in front of Weld,
          the juniors at Grays, the sophomores at Matthews,
          and the freshmen at Massachusetts. The procession
          was scheduled to start at one o’clock, headed by
          a band, which was to lead the way about the yard,
          and finally after a season of cheering both for the
          various classes and the University and the football
          eleven, the route led out of the Johnson Gate and
          so to the Stadium.

          The Harvard team passed the night in seclusion at
          the Brookline Country Club--so, as a Harvard wag
          put it, they would not be forced to hear even the
          faintest echoes of the Harvard-Princeton Glee Club
          “massacre” in Memorial Hall. The Tigers rested far
          from the heart of turmoil, out at the Woodland Park
          Hotel in Auburndale. In the meantime, the Princeton
          supporters, who had not the necessity of keeping
          strict training, disported themselves in various
          agreeable ways at the Copley Plaza, while Harvard
          men, staying up late, were to be found everywhere.

          Neither team physically is in just the condition
          that the coaches would like to have it. Not that
          they are overtrained at all, but various important
          cogs in either machine have suffered in the remote
          or recent past from sprains and pulled tendons,
          which, while healed, may recur at the most
          inopportune moment. For Princeton, Glick, Talbott
          and Ed. Trenkman are liable in this respect, while
          Mahan and Pennock of the Harvard eleven are in the
          same boat. Wallace, the Harvard centre, will not
          enter the lineup because of slow recovery from
          a blow in the head received in the game against
          Michigan. Thus Bigelow will have to play in his
          place, and this is regarded as weakening the
          Crimson centre to some extent. Highley and Shea
          will start as ends for Princeton. Managers of both
          elevens express themselves as delighted with the
          condition of the gridiron, and are pleased, also,
          with the assurances of the weatherwise that by
          afternoon the wind will be a negligible quantity.
          The line-up follows:

            HARVARD.

            Player, class, and position:  Age.   Ht.   Wt.

            T. J. Coolidge, ’15, l. e.     21   5 11¾  175
            K. B. G. Parson, ’16, l. t.    22   6 02½  187
            M. Weston, ’15, l. g.          20   6 03½  194
            D. J. Wallace, ’16, centre     21   5 11   174
            S. B. Pennock, ’15, r. g.      22   5 08½  203
            W. H. Trumbull, ’15, r. t.     21   6 01½  190
            H. R. Hardwick, ’15, r. e.     22   5 11   171
            M. J. Logan, ’15, qb.          21   5 08½  150
            E. W. Mahan, ’16, l. hb.       22   5 11   169
            F. J. Brandlee, ’15, r. hb.    21   5 11½  178
            H. Francke, ’15, fb.           20   6 00¾  189

            SUBSTITUTES.

            J. L. Bigelow, ’16, t. and c.  22   6 00   182
            C. A. Coolidge, jr., ’17, e.   20   5 10½  161
            L. Curtis, ’16, e.             21   6 01½  175
            W. Rollins, ’15, hb.           20   5 07½  158
            H. St. J. Smith, ’15, e.       23   6 01   174
            E. G. Swigert, ’16, qb.        22   5 07   147
            D. C. Watson, ’16, qb.         19   5 09   148
            A. J. Weatherhead, ’15, e.     22   5 10   168
            W. Whitney, ’16, hb.           21   5 10   157
            W. Wilcox, ’16, qb. and hb.    19   5 08   143
            F. B. Withington, ’15, g.      23   6 01½  184

            PRINCETON.

            H. M. Lamberton, ’16, l. e.    21   6 00   178
            W. McLean, ’17, l. t.          19   5 11½  180
            W. J. Shenk, ’15, l. g.        23   5 10½  179
            A. E. Gennert, ’17, c.         18   5 11   180
            E. Trenkman, ’15, r. g.        21   5 11¾  194
            H. R. Ballin, ’15, r. t.       20   6 01   194
            H. G. Brown, ’16, r. e.        20   5 11   174
            K. L. Ames, jr., ’16, qb.      20   5 10½  160
            F. Trenkman, ’15, l. hb.       23   5 08   180
            F. Glick, ’16, r. hb.          21   5 09   178
            E. H. Driggs, jr., ’17, fb.    19   5 11   178

            SUBSTITUTES.

            P. Bigler, ’17, t.             21   5 10   176
            J. S. Baker, ’15, e.           20   5 10   174
            M. A. Charles, ’17, e.         21   5 10½  176
            J. T. A. Doolittle, ’15, hb.   22   5 08¾  159
            C. A. Dickerman, ’17, hb.      22   5 10   169
            C. C. Highley, ’17, e.         19   5 11   162
            T. T. Hogg, ’17, g.            20   6 04   193
            W. D. Love, ’16, t.            21   5 10   186
            B. C. Law, ’16, hb.            19   5 11   163
            R. Nourse, ’17, c. & t.        19   5 11½  186
            E. L. Shea, ’16, e.            21   5 10   166
            D. M. Tibbott, ’17, hb.        18   5 10   170

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The detailed story, play by play,
          followed this under a separate head._

          FOOTBALL GAME

          _Springfield Republican_

            Yale.                                    Princeton.

            Brann, Gould, l e                  r e, Shea, Brown
            Talbott, Loughridge,
                C. Sheldon, l t                     r t, Ballin
            Conroy, Oakes, l g          r g, E. Trenkmann, Hogg
            White, c                       c, Gennert, Haviland
            Walden, r g                       l g, Shenk, Swart
            Betts, J. Sheldon,
                Von Holt, r t                 l t, McLean, Love
            Stillman, Carter, r e      l e, Highley, Lamberton,
                                                 Rayhill, Brown
            A. Wilson, Easton, q b  q b, Ames, Eberstadt, Glick
            Ainsworth, Cornell,
                l h b               r h b, Glick, F. Trenkmann,
                                                    Boland, Law
            Knowles, Scovil, r h b    l h b, Tibbott, Dickerman
            Le Gore, Guernsey, f b           f b, Driggs, Moore

          Score, Yale 19, Princeton 14. Touchdowns,
          Ainsworth, Brann, Scovil, Moore, Glick. Goals from
          touchdowns, Le Gore, Law 2. Referee, Nathan Tufts
          of Brown. Umpire, Carl Marshall of Harvard. Head
          linesman, J. W. Beacham of Cornell. Field judge,
          Fred W. Burleigh of Exeter.

          *       *       *       *       *

          The Yale football team defeated Princeton’s eleven
          yesterday afternoon, 19 to 14, in a game which, for
          thrilling climax, rivaled modern stage craft at its
          best. Beaten back and scored upon with apparent
          ease during the first three periods of play, the
          Tigers tore loose with a smashing attack in the
          final 15 minutes of the game and fairly riddled
          Eli’s line. Twice the orange and black swept
          across the blue goal line and the Princeton men
          were fighting desperately for the third touchdown,
          which would have given them victory, when the
          timer’s call ended Princeton’s chances and Yale’s
          apprehensions.

          No similar situation has developed in the
          annual game between these two university teams
          in many years, and with its thrilling moments
          of spectacular play and gripping uncertainty,
          the contest formed a most fitting dedication of
          Princeton’s new Palmer memorial stadium.

          The setting for the Tigers’ dying rally of the
          season of 1914 was as perfect as if the final
          scenes had been planned weeks in advance. Forty
          thousand spectators from all points of the compass
          invaded Princeton, bearing the flags and emblems
          of the rival institutions. The weather man’s gift
          to the day’s contest was perfect weather overhead
          and a turf unsurpassed for football. The great
          gray horseshoe with its innumerable tiers of seats
          was filled, with the exception of the curve at the
          north end. With a warm sun and an almost entire
          absence of wind, heavy wraps were unnecessary, yet
          down on the green turf of the gridiron shaded by
          the high walls of the stadium the players fought
          out the struggle to the end without suffering the
          inconvenience usually experienced by combatants on
          an Indian summer day.

          During three-quarters of the game there was nothing
          to indicate the sensational climax with which the
          Princeton team was to mark its first game against
          Yale in its new football arena. Forced to take
          the defensive from the very beginning of play,
          the Tigers showed little defensive strength at
          any time, and the blue combination scored in each
          quarter.

          The contest opened with an exchange of punts,
          intermingled with the efforts of the rival
          quarterbacks to ascertain the strength and
          weaknesses of their opponents. Princeton soon found
          that she could make no progress either through
          the line or around the ends, and punted at every
          opportunity. Yale opened with an assortment of
          stabbing line plunges and knife-like dives just
          outside of tackle. The progress, however, was
          not rapid, and the Elis soon fell back on their
          mixture of forward and rugby passing. The initial
          score came when, having secured the ball well in
          Princeton’s territory, Wilson took his center’s
          pass and, after a short run along the left side
          of Princeton’s line, passed the ball back to Le
          Gore. The powerful Yale fullback in turn ran a
          short distance and made a beautiful forward pass to
          Ainsworth, who had rushed up-field, and the latter
          ran more than 20 yards for a touchdown, from which
          Le Gore failed to kick goal.

          Similar tactics were pursued in the second period,
          when Yale, with short gains by line plunges and
          overhead passes, reached a point inside the Tigers’
          final five-yard mark. Here Princeton held firmly
          and the blue was obliged to seek the aerial route
          for scoring, Le Gore making a short pass over the
          line to Brann, who touched down the ball, whereupon
          Le Gore added an additional point by a goal
          following the punt out.

          Scarcely had the third period opened when a
          40-yard forward pass, Le Gore to Brann, gave Yale
          the ball inside Princeton’s 20-yard mark. Six
          rushes, in which Scovil, Wilson and Le Gore worked
          alternately, put the ball across the line for
          Yale’s third and final touchdown. Le Gore failed
          to kick the goal, and with a 19-point lead Coach
          Hinkey of Yale began to send in his substitutes.

          For a few minutes the Eli second string of players
          held the Tigers safe, but with the opening of the
          final quarter Princeton’s jungle men took heart
          and made a savage and maintained attack on Yale’s
          substitutes with the result that in less than 15
          minutes they had rolled up 14 points and were
          threatening to snatch victory from the blue when
          time expired.

          The orange and black team played like a new
          combination after the final minute of rest,
          opening up a rushing game which swept the blues’
          substitutes off their feet. Three, five and eight
          yards at a clip, Princeton’s juggernaut rolled up
          the field until Moore, on a zigzag 16-yard run
          which twice carried him through the Yale line and
          secondary defense, went over for the touchdown
          from which Law kicked goal. Following the kick-off
          came an exchange of punts and then the Tigers cut
          loose again, ramming holes through the Eli forwards
          and sweeping around the end, aided by close
          interference until Glick plowed his way through the
          blue combination for a second touchdown and Law
          kicked goal.

          Hinkey was by this time rushing back his ’varsity
          players into line and backfield, but the Tiger,
          once he tasted Yale blood, was not to be frightened
          away. With less than five minutes of playing
          time remaining, Princeton started its rush for a
          third touchdown. Capt Talbott urged his players
          frantically to make a last stand, and the Elis
          responded nobly. Princeton found its gains cut
          down from yards to feet and resorted to forward
          passes, hoping to gain overhead the ground denied
          them by straight football tactics. Forward pass
          after forward pass was flung far up the field,
          to be grounded or blocked by the blues’ alert
          backfield until, when the timer’s whistle ended the
          struggle, Princeton was holding the ball not far
          from midfield.

          Aside from this surprising flash of offensive
          strength in the last quarter, Princeton was as
          completely outplayed by Yale as by Harvard a
          week ago. The wide open attack in which the blue
          backfield passed the ball from player to player
          in runs around the end and then suddenly switched
          to long forward passes, appeared to bewilder and
          dazzle the Tiger line and secondary defense just as
          much as the crimson’s close formation and concealed
          ball offense.

          The jungle team appeared to have little if any plan
          of campaign, punting frequently upon the first or
          second down with the apparent idea that the ends
          would recover the ball following a Yale fumble. In
          this respect the Elis refused to be accommodating,
          Le Gore and Wilson handling Driggs’s and Law’s
          drives cleanly and frequently running the ball back
          from 10 to 15 yards before being downed.

          Princeton was outdistanced in these kicking duels,
          Le Gore gaining steadily on each exchange of punts
          with Driggs. When these gains had driven the Tigers
          well into their own territory Yale struck viciously
          and, with a bewildering attack, quickly carried the
          ball over for a score. From a defensive standpoint
          the Yale first-string team was never in danger
          from Princeton’s attack, and it was not until the
          second and third-string substitutes went in that
          the orange and black football machine could make
          consistent progress.

          The statistics of play bear out the superiority of
          the Yale team. Yale gained 298 yards by rushing
          to Princeton’s 145 and made 15 first downs to the
          Tigers’ 11. Yale essayed seven forward passes to
          Princeton’s 10, gaining 69 yards to Princeton’s 0.
          Yale punted 27 times to Princeton’s 40 and showed
          an average gain of close to four yards in each
          exchange of punts.

          Penalties were numerous throughout the four
          periods, Yale losing 80 yards in eight setbacks
          to Princeton’s 60 in seven infringements of the
          rules. Yale made three fumbles to Princeton’s
          one, recovering one to Princeton’s two. Including
          the original line-up, substitutions and
          re-substitutions, 57 players took part in the game,
          which is in all probability a record for a contest
          of the caliber of the Yale-Princeton match.

          While in all-around team work Yale outshone
          Princeton, the Tigers uncovered several players who
          from an individual standpoint held their own with
          the Eli stars. Capt. Ballin was, as usual, a tower
          of strength. E. Trenkmann also played a splendid
          game, both these men frequently penetrating the
          blue backfield and stopping rushes or going down
          field under kicks on a line with their ends.
          Gennert’s passing was at times ragged, but he was
          hurried by the concerted charging of his opponents.
          In the last quarter Dickerman and Glick showed
          remarkable ability in line plunging and end runs,
          frequently carrying several Yale tacklers from one
          to three yards before they were finally swept from
          their feet.

          For Yale, Le Gore and Scovil were the stars from an
          offensive standpoint. When carrying the ball they
          kept their feet, following interference or finding
          holes in the line with remarkable skill. Le Gore
          also figured prominently in the forward passing,
          his long spiral heaves to Brann and Ainsworth
          at times reaching the proportions of a kick.
          Quarterback Wilson handled his team cleverly and
          selected plays with splendid judgment.

          In the line Capt. Talbott played a game which
          proved that he has fully recovered from his
          injuries and will give the Harvard men plenty of
          work next week at New Haven in the closing game of
          the Yale and Harvard schedules.

          *       *       *       *       *

          FOOTBALL GAME

          _Springfield Republican_

          CAMBRIDGE, Saturday, October 24.

          Harvard narrowly escaped defeat to-day by Penn
          State, which outplayed the crimson in all
          departments. The score ended in a tie, 13 to
          13. For 46 minutes Penn State drove the Harvard
          ’varsity substitutes about the field, and scored a
          touchdown and a goal from the field in the first 12
          minutes of play.

          The visitors outrushed, outkicked and outmaneuvered
          the crimson, but lost a chance for victory through
          two costly fumbles. In the second period, with
          the score 10 to 0 against it, Harvard recovered a
          fumble on Penn State’s eight-yard line. On three
          attempts Harvard could make no gain, but a score
          came when C. Coolidge caught a forward pass across
          the goal line. Penn State increased its lead to 13
          points toward the end of the game on another field
          goal.

          Two minutes before play ended, Harvard recovered
          the ball on a fumble on the visitors’ 40-yard
          line. On the second play, three rapidly-executed
          lateral passes, based on the rugby game, as
          recently taught the crimson squad by the Canadian
          players, completely mystified Penn State. Willcox
          ran the distance to the goal line for the score.
          He was tackled with a yard to go, but managed to
          fall across the line. Amid a breathless silence
          Withington kicked goal and the score was tied.

          Penn State rushed 54 times for 173 yards gain,
          while the crimson made but 95 yards on 72 rushes.
          Penn State had six first downs, while Harvard made
          but two.

          Lamb, Penn’s big tackle, booted the ball on the
          kick-off to Francke on Harvard’s 10-yard line. The
          new back came in to his own 32-yard line, where he
          was downed. On the third play, Francke was forced
          to kick. James caught the ball on Penn’s 30-yard
          line, returning seven yards. Here the Penn State
          power flashed. Tobin snatched two yards at right
          tackle, followed by James, who made a quarterback
          run around the same side for 15 yards, placing the
          ball past midfield.

          Tobin then, huddled behind superb interference,
          sped around Coolidge’s end for 25 yards. After two
          plays had failed, Lamb kicked a field goal for Penn
          State from the 32-yard line.

          Tobin took Bradlee’s kick-off on his own 13-yard
          line and ran it back 21 yards. Higgins then
          slipped around right end for five yards, and his
          interference so successfully smothered Soucy that
          the new Harvard end was carried from the field.
          At the hospital it was found that he had pulled a
          ligament in his right leg, which was badly bruised.

          It was not long after the first score that the
          visitors carried the ball down the field again.
          The tally came after McKinlock failed to make a
          drop kick, the ball falling into James’s arms on
          his five-yard line. After several big gains, Clark
          carried the ball over on a delayed run around left
          end. Lamb kicked goal. The first quarter ended with
          the score 10 to 0, in favor of Penn State.

          Toward the end of the second period Harvard got
          a chance to score. On the fourth down Bradlee
          kicked to James, who was downed in his tracks on
          the seven-yard line. Penn State tried another
          trick play and again a fumble lost her the ball.
          Swigert had replaced Watson at the beginning of the
          quarter. He dropped back and heaved the ball to C.
          Coolidge, who stood with one foot almost on the
          line marking the limit of the zone behind the goal
          line, when he successfully pulled down the ball for
          a touchdown. Bradlee failed to kick goal.

          About the end of the last quarter Penn got another
          chance to score, when Tobin intercepted a forward
          pass from Swigert. Lamb booted a placement goal
          over from the 26-yard line, making the score 13 to
          6 for Penn. There were only six minutes to play and
          Harvard was desperate. Willcox replaced Rollins
          at left half and made it possible for Harvard to
          tie the score. When James fumbled the ball, R. C.
          Curtis gathered it in and made it Harvard’s ball on
          the 49-yard line. There were two minutes to play.

          On the first play there was a general mix-up, and
          suddenly the ball shot out from the Harvard line to
          Willcox, who started like a shot for Penn’s goal
          line. He dodged Barron, and then went flying past
          three more backs. The last five yards were covered
          with Kratt and Higgins hanging to him, but, when
          the two visitors had been peeled off Willcox, the
          ball was found over the line by several inches.
          Withington’s sure kick tied the score for Harvard
          with one minute left to play. The line-up:--

            Harvard.                                Penn State.

            T. J. Coolidge, C. Coolidge, le        r e, Thomas,
                                                 Barron, Morris
            R. C. Curtis, Parson, l t                 r t, Lamb
            Underwood, Withington, l g           r g, McDonnell
            Wallace, c                                  c, Wood
            Weston, r g                             l g, Miller
            Bigelow, r t                             l t, Kratt
            Soucy, Weatherhead, r e                l e, Higgins
            Watson, Swigert, q b                     q b, James
            McKinlock, Whitney, Rollins,
                Willcox, l h b                     r h b, Tobin
            Francke, King, r h b                  l h b, Welly,
                                                       Edgerton
            Bradlee, McKinlock, f b                  f b, Clark

          Score, Harvard 13, Penn State 13. Touchdowns, C.
          Coolidge, Willcox, Clark. Goals from touchdowns,
          Withington, Lamb. Goals from field, Lamb 2.
          Referee, W. N. Morne of Penn. Umpire, Fred W.
          Murphy of Brown. Head linesman, G.V. Brown of
          Boston A. A. Time, 30-minute halves.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ANALYSIS OF FOOTBALL GAME

          _New York Evening Post_

          (Condensed)

          BY FAIR PLAY.

          If there was a Yale graduate who did not feel the
          impulse to stand in his place and uncover silently
          to a little knot of athletes in blue gathered to
          give their bulldog bark of victory at the close
          of a bitterly fought struggle with Princeton in
          the Bowl on Saturday, that graduate had lost the
          edge of a certain fine spirit which the sons of
          Eli are supposed to take with them out into the
          world. From their seats the undergraduates stormed
          on to the field, gyrating in their uncontained
          exuberance, cheering, shouting, writhing in the
          intricacies of the snake dance. And they did well,
          these ebullient undergrads--precisely what they
          should have done; but to the thinking Yale men
          whose remoteness from their student days has seen
          year piled on year, there must have come deeper
          emotions which made, shall we say, for reverence,
          rather than for the casting off of mental, not to
          say physical, restraint. For the Yale eleven did a
          memorable thing on Saturday. Through sheer spirit,
          through indomitable determination, through utter
          willingness to give the final measure of physical
          sacrifice, those men of Yale lifted from the muck
          a bedraggled, bedaubed blue banner, holding it
          on high so that it floated and snapped proudly
          once more, glorified by the light of victory. It
          was fine. It meant more, that victory--stood for
          more--than the mere winning of a football game.
          It went deep into the roots of extra-curricular
          endeavor and gave that sanction for intercollegiate
          contest which does not always appear. The elements
          that won that game against a powerful, spirited
          rival are elements that not even the most dryasdust
          pedant, wedded to the scholastic cloister, can
          talk down. And it is good for Yale or any other
          university, to have these developed upon the field
          of competitive athletics as in other departments
          of college life, essential and subsidiary. In the
          matter of Saturday’s game, this applies as much to
          those who, filled with foreboding, assembled none
          the less thousands upon thousands to cheer and sing
          for Yale, as to the players.

          “I don’t know that we can hold Princeton,” said
          a Yale coach a few hours before the contest.
          “Privately, I don’t think we can. But you may count
          upon this: not a man of Yale will yield to-day
          until he is carried from the field.”

          That was the spirit that won for Yale, the spirit
          that won against an eleven better equipped to play
          finished football, against an outfit which gained
          two yards to Yale’s one, which made twelve first
          downs to Yale’s four.

          *       *       *

          If the Tigers had not matched the best fighting
          qualities of Princeton spirit against the best that
          Yale spirit stands for the lustre of Yale’s feat
          would not have been so bright--would have lost
          much of its significance. But that grim, undying
          quality, win or lose, that Princeton partisans look
          for and expect was not lacking in the Orange and
          Black. The contest was fought out to the end, with
          the enormous throng standing spellbound, cheers
          and inarticulate cries muffled in their throats,
          watching the balance of victory as it inclined this
          way and that. The contest had not the technical
          excellence of some big games we have seen--from
          this standpoint the Harvard-Princeton game was
          superior--but in its spectacular characteristics,
          in its sequence of thrills, in its swift, shuttling
          changes, it stood out by itself.

          *       *       *

          In Princeton Yale defeated an eleven which
          possessed a stronger and more varied attack,
          with a defence which could keep the Blue from
          rushing the ball into what may be termed promising
          touchdown territory. In all that the term implies
          the Tigers had a machine which was superior to the
          Yale machine, inasmuch as it had the power not
          only to gain in midfield, but to cross the chalk
          marks. The Tigers made one touchdown by clean
          rushing and forward passing, and had a break not
          occurred at the supreme moment, her rushing prowess
          in the last quarter would have been rewarded by
          another touchdown. Further Glick’s generalship
          was execrable upon many occasions. In the first
          quarter Wilson dropped a long booming punt from
          Driggs, and Highley, picking it up on the bound,
          was tackled one stride short of getting clear for a
          touchdown. The ball was on Yale’s thirty-yard line.
          Now, instead of going outside tackle, Princeton
          essayed a series of centre bucks with quarter and
          halves, which every Princeton scout must have told
          Glick could not succeed against Yale. Thus the
          downs were exhausted. Guernsey punted weakly from
          his twenty-yard line, giving Princeton the ball on
          Yale’s twenty-seven-yard mark, where instead of
          going off tackle or around the end Princeton tried
          two line plunges and then threw the ball away by
          a forward pass over the goal line, the same being
          translated automatically into a touchback for
          Yale. Thereafter, throughout the game, Princeton
          turned time and again to centre plunges, usually
          unsuccessfully, whereas not many of her sweeps
          around the Yale wings failed to gain materially.
          They say her gains in this way were sporadic,
          but this was only because the play was attempted
          sporadically. Nassau’s off-tackle plays and delayed
          passes gained a great deal of ground and put Yale
          in danger more than once; yet usually a down or
          two were used up on centre bucks, when Princeton
          should have known she was wasting her strength.
          Where Yale was vastly superior to Princeton was in
          following the ball and in holding it.

          *       *       *

          Yale’s first goal was clean and untarnished.
          Guernsey kicked it from the fifty-three-yard
          line, and it was as fine an effort as I have ever
          seen. The ball struck the cross bar and toppled
          over. But Yale’s second field goal was a direct
          gift from Princeton. Brown was sent in to relieve
          Highley and committed the gross and inexcusable
          error of speaking to Capt. Glick before reporting
          to the referee. The referee promptly and justly
          set Princeton back fifteen yards to her own
          twenty-eight yard line. After two rushes had failed
          to gain, Yale did the obvious thing; she sent
          Guernsey back to kick a field goal. This he did.
          Princeton then fell to work and rushed the ball
          downfield to the Yale goal line, where the ball
          was held directly on the final chalk-mark before
          it was finally pushed an inch or two over; it was
          a splendid piece of grim defence by Yale, but the
          ball was too close. Thus the half ended. The half
          was characterized by a piece of roughness on the
          part of a Princeton man who hurled himself upon a
          prostrate Yale receiver of a forward pass after he
          had been downed. Princeton was justly penalized
          for undue roughness, as she was in the last period
          when a Princetonian roughed a Yale player in a play
          which ended out of bounds. Such incidents leave a
          bad taste in the mouth. It was done in the heat of
          a hot game, and no injury resulted because of no
          real design to injure, but that is no excuse.

          *       *       *

          The second half assumed a blue tinge almost
          immediately when Tibbott dropped a long spiral
          from Guernsey and Way picked up the ball and
          ran for a touchdown. The remainder of the third
          period was characterized by one or two well-worked
          forward passes and some goodly gains off tackle by
          Princeton, with Yale on the defensive satisfied
          as matters stood. The fourth period saw Princeton
          hungry for a score, playing like all-possessed,
          with Yale conducting herself cautiously, and
          always seeking to get Guernsey in a position to
          drop a field goal. But the Elis--who were not
          able to make a first down in this half--would
          not have got sufficiently near to Princeton’s
          goal to try a kick for score had not Dickerman
          dropped a Yale punt on his eighteen-yard line,
          Yale recovering. The Blue could not gain, but
          profited by Dickerman’s fumble to the extent of
          giving Guernsey a chance for a dropkick. He made
          the goal cleanly, but it did not count because of
          holding on the part of Yale; the holding may or
          may not have affected the success of the kick, but
          rules are rules, and the holding was obvious even
          to some of the spectators. A few minutes later
          Princeton, with Moore in the lineup, took advantage
          of a weak punt against the wind by Guernsey and
          unleashed an irresistible attack, which started
          from Yale’s thirty-two-yard line. End-runs and
          off-tackle plays, with a forward pass to spread
          Yale’s defence, took the ball to Eli’s seven-yard
          line. Here was what the Princeton adherents had
          been looking for; the multitude of sixty-odd
          thousand became so quiet that the quarterback’s
          signals echoed and reëchoed throughout the immense
          amphitheatre. An assault at the line was killed for
          a loss. Then, with the Yale defence packed closely
          to the left, Glick took the ball and gave it to
          Dickerman. The Yale defence dashed straight in. The
          fleet-footed Moore, sprinting to the right, was
          completely clear. Dickerman threw the ball to him
          laterally. It was not a perfect throw, but it was
          within reach of the fast-running Moore, who, with a
          clean catch, could have walked over the goal-line.
          But it glanced from his fingers. He still had time
          to pick it up on the bound and score; the oval hit
          his knee and bounded over the side-line, in touch.
          Right there waned and flickered Princeton’s last
          hope, a hope valiantly essayed, a hope which died
          at the moment when it was being translated into a
          flaming reality. The contest ended a few minutes
          later. In justice to Moore it may be said that
          Dickerman’s toss might have been better done. It
          came too swift, too much in a line, still, the
          throw might have been spoiled had it gone too
          slowly.

          *       *       *

          Where Yale shone, wherein she has hope to make
          trouble for Harvard, is in her punting and
          drop-kicking, her down field ability and sharp
          tackling of her team; the close, unerring following
          of the ball and the splendid spirit of the players
          individually, and as a whole. Her wing defence and
          defence off tackle must improve between now and
          next Saturday, probably will. Her forward-passing
          game is not dangerous, and she launches a driving
          attack from her Minnesota shift formation better
          qualified for midfield gains than for gains inside
          her opponent’s thirty-five-yard line. Perhaps she
          can work up her off-tackle slashes so that they
          will carry farther than they did against Princeton,
          but if she can repeatedly get Guernsey anywhere
          from Harvard’s forty-yard line on she may not need
          touchdowns in order to win. For Guernsey is a toe
          artist of real stature. As to the Yale players
          individually it is impossible to speak, because not
          being numbered, the various men were identified
          only by word of mouth and word of mouth is usually
          inaccurate and misleading. Guernsey, of course,
          was recognized because he did the punting, and Way
          was known because he was prominent as a baseball
          pitcher and, besides, wore no head guard. But as
          to the exact identity of most of the rest I have
          no notion upon which I may rely. One of the Yale
          halfbacks played a slashing game offensively, and
          the entire backfield shone in returning punts and
          kickoffs. The three centre men were impregnable,
          but the tackles and ends worked inconsistently
          on off-tackle plays and end runs. Harvard may
          take some unction in the fact that Yale can still
          be fooled by an elusive attack. Yale’s basket
          formation for forward-pass defence, four men
          back, was well conceived--it was patterned after
          the Harvard defence--but her normal defensive
          arrangement of backs, three abreast, twelve yards
          back, is open to grave criticism. She got her shift
          into action in good style, and the backs started
          quickly. She lacks long-gain plays.

          *       *       *

          John Rush has not the slightest cause for being
          disheartened over the results of his first
          season’s work. He gave to Princeton the first
          offensive team she has had since 1899, a team which
          made a splendid reputation up to her big games,
          both of which, as a matter of fact, might have been
          won under different circumstances. Rush constructed
          an engine, a strong, impressive engine, several
          parts of which snapped under high tension in the
          course of the two supreme tests. In no way can Rush
          be charged with the loss of either game. In both,
          failures came through manual errors on the part of
          individuals, and these no coach can prevent. Vide
          Haughton and the Harvard-Cornell game. Princeton
          in Rush has a rare jewel, who has made good
          convincingly.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BASEBALL GAME

          _Boston Post_

          NEW YORK, Aug. 22.--New York made it two straight
          over Chicago today, winning the second game of the
          series by a score of 8 to 1. Cheney was wild and
          ineffective in the third inning, when the champions
          took a winning lead by scoring three runs. Vaughn,
          a former member of the New York Americans, who is
          trying to come back with Chicago, was not hard hit,
          but the champions bunched their three hits with his
          two passes for four runs.

          Tesreau, the New York pitcher, was very wild,
          but the Chicago batsmen could not hit him with
          men on bases. Zimmerman fouled out twice with
          the bases full. Chicago filled the bases in the
          first inning with none out, on Leach’s triple and
          passes to Evers and Schulte. Only one run was
          scored, however, Saier’s infield out putting over
          the tally. New York tied the score in the second
          on Merkle’s single and steal, Snodgrass’ infield
          out and McLean’s single. Three runs followed when
          Cheney hit two men, issued a pass and was hit for a
          single and a double.

          Herzog made two doubles and a single in four times
          up, and was responsible for five of the New York
          runs, driving in two and scoring three. Archer, the
          Chicago catcher, had a bad day. Five bases were
          stolen on him, and he had two passed balls, one of
          which let in a run.

          The score:

            NEW YORK.             AB.  R. BH. TB. PO.  A. E.

            Burns, l f             3   1   0   0   1   0  0
            Shafer, 2b             2   1   0   0   1   5  0
            Fletcher, ss           2   2   0   0   0   3  0
            Herzog, 3b             4   3   3   5   2   0  0
            Merkle, 1b             4   1   2   2  10   0  0
            Murray, r f            4   0   1   1   3   0  0
            Snodgrass, c f         3   0   0   0   4   0  0
            McLean, c              4   0   1   1   6   0  0
            Tesreau, p             4   0   0   0   0   3  0
                                  --  --  --  --  --  -- --
              Totals              30   8   7   9  27  11  0

            CHICAGO.              AB.  R. BH. TB. PO.  A. E.

            Leach, c f             4   1   1   3   0   0  1
            Evers, 2b              2   0   0   0   2   3  0
            Schulte, r f           3   0   1   1   1   0  0
            Zimmerman, 3b          4   0   1   1   1   4  0
            Saier, 1b              3   0   1   1  11   1  0
            Williams, l f          4   0   0   0   1   0  0
            Bridwell, ss           3   0   0   0   1   1  0
            Archer, c              4   0   1   1   4   2  0
            Cheney, p              1   0   0   0   1   1  0
            [_a_]Stewart           1   0   0   0   0   0  0
            Vaughn, p              1   0   0   0   2   0  0
            [_b_]Good,             1   0   0   0   0   0  0
                                  --  --  --  --  --  -- --
              Totals              31   1   5   7  24  12  1

            [_a_] Batted for Cheney in the fifth.

            [_b_] Batted for Vaughn in the ninth.

            New York            0 1 3 0 1 0 3 0  --8
            Chicago             1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0--1

          Two-base hits--Herzog 2. Three-base hit--Leach.
          Stolen bases--Burns, Merkle 2, Murray, Herzog.
          Double play--Fletcher to Shafer to Merkle. First
          base on balls--Off Tesreau 6, off Cheney 3, off
          Vaughn 2. Hit by pitcher--Fletcher, Snodgrass (by
          Cheney). Passed balls--Archer 2. Hits--Off Cheney 4
          in 4 innings, off Vaughn 3 in 4 innings. Time--1h.
          50m. Umpires--Rigler and Byron.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BASEBALL GAME

          _Boston Globe_

          BY T. H. MURNANE.

          The fourth game of the important series with the
          Detroit Tigers at Fenway Park was a clean-cut
          victory for the Boston team by a score of 2 to 1.

          It was a great pitchers’ battle between Coveleskie,
          the left-hander, and Ernie Shore, and the Boston
          man won out by outstaying the Tiger pitcher.

          It was the second time that Coveleskie has worked
          in the series here, while Boston presented Shore
          for the first time, although he proved by far the
          strongest boxman the club had to tame the Tigers
          with.

          The visitors started off in a savage manner on the
          Boston pitcher, scoring their only run on three
          singles in succession. After that Shore seemed
          to find himself, and with the assistance of some
          clever throwing to second by Forrest Cady and grand
          ground-covering by the Boston outfield, as well as
          smooth work around the infield, Shore prevented the
          Tigers from making the rounds of the bases after
          the first inning.

          The Boston run that tied the score in the second
          was a gift by Owen Bush, who made a wild throw to
          first on Barry’s grounder, and the winning run was
          scored in the seventh inning on a single by Lewis
          and a double by Barry, Crawford allowing the ball
          to pass him while making a great try for a low
          drive.

          The intense rivalry between the two teams, although
          subdued, was visible in many ways; and yet the game
          went off smoothly, as most games do when umpired by
          Billy Evans, and the large crowd was delighted with
          its afternoon’s outing.

          *       *       *       *       *

          It was Rockland Day at Fenway Park and fully 1000
          fans were present from that energetic town. Before
          the game they marched around the field to the music
          of a band; then they were ushered into the right
          wing of the grandstand, where they had a delightful
          afternoon, rooting for the Red Sox and punctuating
          their applause with the bass drum.

          As Rockland is a town where President Lannin
          spent many of his boyhood days, he was especially
          delighted to see such a splendid gathering. A
          beautiful gold watch and chain were presented to
          the Red Sox president.

          There was also a large delegation of Boston waiters
          present as President Lannin’s guests, and still
          another large delegation will be out today. As the
          waiters could not all leave business at once, they
          split up their calls between two games.

          The attendance given out, 11,315, did not include
          the fans from Rockland or the waiters from Boston.

          The day was dark and cloudy, and before three
          innings were over a light sprinkling of rain caused
          the fans in the bleachers to make for the covered
          pavilions, where they were allowed to go. There was
          quite a heavy sprinkle again in the fifth inning,
          but the game went on, with a strong, cold wind
          blowing across the field.

          So intensely interesting was the game that the fans
          sat as if glued to their seats until the last man
          went out, when a good, stiff shout went up for the
          Speed Boys, and the Tigers walked off the field
          sore to the quick and in the worst kind of humor
          for fan talk.

          *       *       *       *       *

          With one out in the first inning, Bush singled.
          Cobb hit safely to center on the first ball.
          Crawford singled over second, scoring Bush. Veach
          was thrown out at first, and Burns was disposed
          of by Janvrin, Boston getting out of a very bad
          corner. The Red Sox went out in order on three weak
          infield flies.

          In the second Young was safe at first on a wild
          throw by Cady. Baker hit to Janvrin, who refused to
          toss the ball to Barry, but instead ran to second,
          touched the bag and threw wild to first. No damage
          was done, however, as Coveleskie flied to left and
          Vitt was thrown out at first.

          Gainor was hit by a pitched ball and sacrificed to
          second by Lewis. Gardner struck out. Barry hit a
          ball to short that Bush took well back of the line
          and threw short to first, the ball bounding over
          Burns’ shoulder and allowing Gainor to score the
          tying run.

          Bush opened the third with a single. Cobb smashed
          a liner to center that Speaker made a great catch
          of. Then Crawford and Veach sent high flies to the
          outfield. Boston could make no headway against the
          Tiger pitcher.

          In the fourth inning both teams went out in order.
          Gainor, having reached first, was doubled up on
          Lewis’ grounder to the pitcher.

          In the fifth, with two down, Bush was given a base
          hit when Janvrin failed to get a ball that came to
          him on a merry bound. Cobb got in a scratch single,
          and with big Sam Crawford up it was a trying moment
          until he sent a long fly that Speaker pulled down.

          With two down in this inning, Cady dropped one in
          right field for two bases, to see Shore thrown out
          at first.

          The Tigers went out in order in the sixth. Young,
          drawing a pass, was nailed when he tried for
          second, as Cady was in fine throwing form. Janvrin
          was hit by a pitched ball, but never left first.

          With two down in the seventh, Vitt singled and
          tried for second, but again Cady’s throw was
          perfect.

          Lewis led off with a single to center. Gardner was
          patient and got Coveleskie in for three balls. Then
          came two strikes and Larry was forced to hit, Young
          handling his fast grounder in fine style. Barry hit
          a low liner to right that Crawford made a great try
          for, the ball hitting the ground and rolling past
          him, Lewis scoring what proved to be the winning
          run.

          It was now up to the Red Sox to hold their
          advantage and keep the Tigers from scoring. Bush, a
          hard man to get, was called out on strikes, Shore
          displaying remarkably clever form at this stage
          of the game. Cobb was forced to hit, as Shore was
          putting the ball over the center of the pen. Ty
          missed twice and then hit a sharp grounder that
          Janvrin played to first. Crawford sent one to
          Hooper and things brightened for the home team.

          *       *       *       *       *

          In the ninth Veach smashed a line fly to right that
          Hooper timed to a nicety while playing very deep
          and pulled down after a sharp run. Burns smashed
          the first ball to the bank in left center for two
          bases, and the Tigers got busy on the coaching
          lines and in the dugout, cheering like wild men for
          a hit.

          Kavanagh was sent in to bat for Young, and drew a
          pass, as Shore would not take a chance to groove a
          ball for this slugger. McKee went to bat for Baker
          and was thrown out by Shore.

          With men at third and second, where a hit would
          more than likely win the game for the Tigers, Dubuc
          was sent in to bat for Coveleskie, with two down,
          and he smashed away at the first ball dished up,
          driving the leather to left center, where Speaker
          pulled it down after a sharp run, and the game was
          over.

          The best fielding features were furnished by Bush,
          who displayed remarkable ability in covering
          ground, really making hard plays easy by his
          phenomenally quick starts. Hooper and Speaker, as
          well as Barry and Cady, did some sharp fielding for
          the Red Sox.

          But to Shore belongs about 75 per cent of the glory
          for winning the game, for after the first inning he
          settled down and was steady as well as effective.
          He was given what belonged to him by Umpire Evans,
          and was not forced to suffer as the other Boston
          pitchers were, with Mr. Chill behind the plate. The
          score:

            BOSTON            AB  R BH TB PO  A  E

            Hooper rf          4  0  0  0  2  0  0
            Janvrin ss         3  0  1  1  2  3  0
            Speaker cf         4  0  0  0  4  0  0
            Gainor 1b          2  1  0  0 11  0  0
            Lewis lf           3  1  1  1  2  0  0
            Gardner 3b         3  0  0  0  0  1  0
            Barry 2b           3  0  1  2  2  4  0
            Cady c             3  0  1  2  4  2  1
            Shore p            3  0  0  0  0  2  0
                              -- -- -- -- -- -- --
            Totals            28  2  4  6 27 12  1

            DETROIT

            Vitt 3b            4  0  1  1  1  0  0
            Bush ss            4  1  3  3  2  3  1
            Cobb cf            4  0  2  2  1  0  0
            Crawford rf        4  0  1  1  0  0  0
            Veach lf           4  0  0  0  1  0  0
            Burns 1b           4  0  1  2 11  0  0
            Young 2b           2  0  0  0  3  4  0
            Baker c            3  0  0  0  5  0  0
            Coveleskie p       3  0  0  0  0  4  0
            [D]Kavanagh        0  0  0  0  0  0  0
            [E]McKee           1  0  0  0  0  0  0
            [F]Dubuc           1  0  0  0  0  0  0
                              -- -- -- -- -- -- --
              Totals          34  1  8  9 24 11  1

            [D] Batted for Young in ninth.

            [E] Batted for Baker in ninth.

            [F] Batted for Coveleskie in ninth.

              Innings  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
            Boston     0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0  --2
            Detroit    1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0--1

          Earned runs, Detroit, Boston. Two-base hits, Cady,
          Burns, Barry. Sacrifice hit, Lewis. Base on balls,
          by Shore 2, by Coveleskie. First base on errors,
          Boston, Detroit. Left on bases, Boston 5, Detroit
          7. Struck out, by Shore 4, by Coveleskie 3. Double
          play, Coveleskie, Young and Burns. Hit by pitched
          ball, by Coveleskie, Janvrin, Gainor. Time, 1h 52m.
          Umpires, Evans and Chill.

          *       *       *       *       *

          BASEBALL GAME

          _New York Times_

          Look: there he goes!!

          Ty Cobb is loose again on a base galloping spree.
          He romps to first on a single. Slim Caldwell
          pitches to Nunamaker, and the ball nestles in his
          big mitt. Cobb, a few feet off first, suddenly
          bolts into action and races to second. Nunamaker,
          amazed at the Georgian’s daring, stands dumfounded.

          He throws the ball to Dan Boone just as the
          Southern Flyer jumps into second base. The steel
          spikes flash in the waning sun and Cobb is lost in
          a cloud of dust. Nunamaker’s nervous toss rolls
          into centre field and the Georgia Gem bounds to
          his feet and tears to third. He’s as safe as the
          Bank of England. Cobb’s sarcastic smile angers his
          hoodwinked opponents.

          Now the speed-crazed comet dashes up and down the
          third-base line, trying to rattle Caldwell. Will
          Cobb have the nerve to try to steal home? You said
          it; he will. Caldwell doesn’t think so. No one
          thinks so, but Cobb. The Yanks’ lanky pitcher hurls
          the ball at the batsman like a rifle ball. As the
          ball left his hand Cobb bounded over the ground
          like a startled deer.

          At the plate crouched Nunamaker. He was so
          surprised that he didn’t know his own name. Cobb
          dashed through the air toward the scoring pan. His
          lithe body swerved away from Nunamaker’s reach and
          clouds of dirt kicked up by his spikes blinded the
          eyes of Nunamaker, Caldwell, and Silk O’Loughlin.

          The umpire ruled that the catcher didn’t touch
          Cobb. He also ruled that Cobb hadn’t touched the
          plate. While the Yankee players were protesting
          Cobb sneaked around the bunch and touched the
          plate.

          A smart young feller, this same Cobb.

          The bold piracy of Captain Kidd was like taking
          ice-cream cones from children compared with
          that. Caldwell threw his glove high in the air
          in derision at O’Loughlin’s decision. Naturally
          Caldwell and Nunamaker were in a very disturbed
          state of mind.

          So is a man when a “dip” relieves him of his
          watch-chain and wallet. Cobb pulled the wool over
          their eyes like a “sharper” unloading mining stock
          on a Rube. Caldwell was put out of the game for
          being mad because Cobb had outwitted him.

          Aside from this outburst of daring the Southern
          Flyer also contributed all the other means whereby
          the Detroits were able to shut out the Yankees at
          the Polo Grounds yesterday by a score of 3 to 0.
          Oscar Vitt had teased a pass from Caldwell in the
          first inning. Cobb strutted chestily to the bat.
          From the coaching lines pearls of oratorical wisdom
          began to drop from Hughie Jennings’s chiseled lips.

          It sounded like this: “Come on you, Ty boy,
          attababy. Only one out, O, Ty. Bring ’em in; you
          kin do it. Old pepperino, Ty boy. Attaway to hit a
          baseball. E-E-E-Eh Yah, here we go.”

          Cobb gracefully swung on the ball. With a
          resounding crash it started on its dizzy flight
          between right and centre fields. The Georgia racer
          gathered speed as he went along. Bounding over the
          ground like a phantom, he turned first, flashed
          past second, and pulled up smiling at third, with
          Vitt already over the pan. Cobb’s batting .400.
          Going up?

          Then came old Sam Crawford, Cobb’s partner in the
          pitcher-wrecking business. Sam would never leave
          his friend Cobb stranded like a wooden Indian
          on the bases, not if he could help it. Crawford
          reasoned this way. He figured that if he didn’t
          propel Tyrus home, Cobb would steal home, anyway,
          and cause the Yankees a lot of embarrassment. So
          Wahoo Sam cracked out a single and Cobb walked
          home. The score:

                      DETROIT.
                       AB  R  H PO  A

            Bush, ss    4  0  1  4  4
            Vitt, 3b    3  1  0  3  3
            Cobb, cf    4  2  2  1  0
            C’ford, rf  4  0  1  1  0
            Veach, lf   4  0  0  0  0
            Kav’h, 1b   4  0  1 13  1
            Young, 2b   3  0  0  1  7
            McKee, c    2  0  0  4  0
            Dubuc, p    3  0  0  0  0
                       -- -- -- -- --
              Total    31  3  5 27 15

                   NEW YORK.
                       AB R H PO A
            M’sel, 3b   4  0  1  0  0
            P’p’gh, ss  4  0  0  4  4
            Cree, cf    4  0  1  5  0
            Pipp, 1b    3  0  0  9  1
            Cook, rf    3  0  0  1  0
            H’tz’l, lf  3  0  1  2  0
            Boone, 2b   4  0  1  1  1
            Sw’ney, c   3  0  0  5  0
            [G]High     0  0  0  0  0
            N’m’ker, c  0  0  0  0  1
            C’well, p   3  0  0  0  2
            Pieh, p     0  0  0  0  0
                       -- -- -- -- --
             Total     31  0  4 27  9

            [G] Ran for Sweeney in seventh inning.

            Errors--Vitt, Nunamaker.

            Detroit    2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1--3
            New York   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0--0

          Two-base hit--Maisel. Three-base hit--Cobb. Stolen
          bases--Cook, Cobb (2.) Earned runs--Detroit, 2.
          Sacrifice hit--McKee. Left on bases--New York, 7;
          Detroit, 4. First base on error--New York. Bases
          on balls--Off Caldwell, 2; off Dubuc, 2. Hits--Off
          Caldwell, 4 in 8 2-3 innings; off Pieh, 1 in 1-3
          inning. Hit by pitcher--By Dubuc, (Cook.) Struck
          out--By Caldwell, 5; by Dubuc, 2. Time of game--One
          hour and fifty-five minutes. Umpires--Messrs.
          O’Loughlin and Hildebrand.

          *       *       *       *       *

          COLLEGE CREW PROSPECTS

          _New York Times_

          After a long rest, candidates for the Columbia
          ’Varsity crew will be called out next week to start
          the long training for the Spring races and for the
          intercollegiate regatta on the Hudson in June.
          Jim Rice, coach of the Blue and White navy, will
          order the men to the rowing machines on the opening
          day of college following the Christmas recess,
          for practice until the end of the examinations
          following the first term. Daily work on the
          machines will then be ordered, and the crew men
          will not have any further let-up in their training.

          Rice is confronted with a difficult task this
          season in finding the material to build up a
          winning crew to match the eight which swept the
          Hudson last June and won the intercollegiate
          championship of America. Only three men of this
          crew have returned to college. A new stroke must be
          developed, and practically an entirely new eight
          built up, from the junior squad of last season.

          Those who have seen Coach Rice whip together crews
          will not, however, be discouraged at this time. In
          years past Coach Rice has started out the season
          with an untrained and comparatively small squad of
          oarsmen and has startled college circles with a
          wonderful eight, ready by the time the Spring races
          rolled around. It is fair to assume that a similar
          feat will be performed this year.

          An example of Coach Rice’s ability in this respect
          was furnished last season in the building up of
          a junior ’Varsity eight. With the exception of
          Robinson, the oarsmen from the two freshmen eights
          of 1915 and 1916, both of which finished last in
          the freshmen races at Poughkeepsie, were whipped
          into shape as the junior eight and finished
          second against all the other colleges in the
          intercollegiate regatta.

          It is on these eight men, with the three men left
          over from the ’Varsity eight and a couple of
          freshmen of last season, that Coach Rice will have
          to depend for this year’s ’Varsity eight. The most
          telling loss this season is the graduation of C. F.
          McCarthy, who stroked the winning eight, and Capt.
          Irving Hadsell, who rowed at No. 7, two of the
          best and gamest oarsmen who ever sat in a Columbia
          shell. Steddiford Pitt is another splendid blade
          who is lost to the crew this year, and the strength
          and fight found in Rothwell are hard to spare.

          The three men who must serve as the nucleus for
          this year’s eight are Bratton, who rowed at No. 6;
          Sanborn, who rowed at No. 4, and Naumer, who rowed
          at bow. Bratton was one of the strongest men in
          the eight, weighing 180 pounds, and there is no
          question but that Coach Rice will place him back
          in the waist of the shell this season. Naumer is
          a good oarsman, and obtained his seat at bow last
          season purely on his merits, as evidenced after a
          long tryout against Cronenberg for the position.
          It is highly probable that Naumer will be moved
          further down in the boat this year, and that
          Cronenberg will get his place at bow.

          Much speculation centres about the selection of
          stroke of the eight. Ex-Capt. “Irv.” Hadsell
          predicts that Frank McCarthy will find a way to
          get back in his old position this Spring, but
          positive denials by McCarthy seem to indicate
          otherwise. The two logical men for the position as
          pacemaker of the eight are Myers, who stroked the
          junior boat last season, and Sanborn, who stroked
          the 1915 freshmen crew, rowed at No. 2 in the
          ’Varsity four of 1913, and held down the place at
          No. 4 in the ’Varsity of 1914.

          The student body is faced with the task of raising
          $2,700 to take care of the crew debt contracted in
          1913-14. A few of the alumni have been supporting
          the crew with large donations, and at present they
          hold notes for the above amount. Recently, however,
          an appeal was sent out to the undergraduates to
          help bear the burden, and their response has been
          quick and loyal.

          The Greek letter fraternities at Columbia have come
          forward with $500, and the undergraduates prior to
          leaving for the holidays pledged an equal amount.
          Further efforts will be made when the students
          return, and it is confidently expected about the
          campus that a good share of the indebtedness will
          be paid off within a few months.

          *       *       *       *       *

          COLLEGE ROWING REGATTA

          _Christian Science Monitor_

          HARVARD-YALE WINNERS FOR 1915

            FIRST VARSITY EIGHTS
            Yale                 20m. 52s.

            SECOND VARSITY EIGHTS
            Yale                 10m. 40s.

            FRESHMAN EIGHTS
            Yale               [H]8m.  6s.

            FRESHMAN FOURS
            Harvard               6m. 21s.

            GRADUATE EIGHTS
            Harvard               3m. 5½s.

            [H] Mile and a half by agreement.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NEW LONDON, Conn.--By making a clean sweep of
          the three major events of their annual regatta
          with Harvard on the Thames river Friday, Yale is
          today champion over Harvard in rowing, and, with
          previous victories over Cornell, Pennsylvania
          and Princeton, will be generally regarded as
          intercollegiate rowing champions of the United
          States for 1915.

          That Yale deserves the victories which she won over
          the Crimson Friday is certain. The Eli varsity
          captured one of the biggest victories over the
          Harvard varsity when she won by about five lengths
          in the record time of 20m. 52s., that the Blue
          has registered against the Crimson in many years.
          The race was rowed upstream, which makes the time
          a new record, and it is stated by those who have
          followed rowing on the Thames for many years, that
          had the race been rowed down stream Yale would
          probably have broken the record of 20m. 10s. for
          the course. It is also interesting to note that the
          Harvard varsity was inside of the old record for
          the upstream course.

          Yale owes her victory to the coaching of Guy
          Nickalls, the famous English college oarsman. It
          was the second year that Nickalls had coached the
          Yale varsity and both years he has turned out crews
          which have defeated the Crimson.

          Yale took the lead at the very start of the varsity
          race and was never caught by Harvard. Rowing a
          lower stroke almost the entire distance, Yale kept
          drawing away from the Crimson oarsmen and, despite
          the fact that Stroke Lund succeeded in getting his
          crew to raise the stroke to as high as 34 beats to
          the minute over the last part of the race, Yale,
          rowing a much lower and easier stroke, was able to
          increase its lead.

          While the Harvard crew appeared to be a smoother
          rowing eight than Yale’s it did not move through
          the water nearly as well. There was a perceptible
          drag to the Harvard varsity between strokes, while
          the Yale eight went evenly and showed very little
          if any slowing up between the strokes. At all times
          the Harvard crew appeared to be better together,
          but it did not make as good use of the slides as
          the Yale eight. The rigging did not appear to fit
          the Harvard oarsmen to the best advantage.

          Yale won the freshman race by about a length and
          a half. This race was a very unsatisfactory one.
          The event was to have been rowed in the morning,
          but was postponed until after the varsity race.
          It did not start until about 7:30 in the evening.
          After the race had been under way a few minutes
          the Harvard stroke caught a crab and the crews
          were stopped. It was then agreed to start again
          and row a mile and a half instead of the customary
          two miles. Yale finally won this race although
          the Crimson oarsmen made the contest much closer
          than the varsity race. Yale’s time was 8m. 6s. and
          Harvard 8m. 10s.

          The race for second varsity eights was the hardest
          fought of the day and the Yale victory in 19m. 40s.
          opened a very successful day for Yale. The official
          times of the varsity and freshman races by half
          miles follow:

          VARSITY

                       Yale   Harvard
            ½  mile    2:05     2:08½
            1  mile    4:40     4:45
            1½ miles   7:27½    7:34
            2  miles  10:05    10:14
            2½ miles  12:39½   12:52
            3  miles  15:27    15:39
            3½ miles  18:22    18:40
            4  miles  20:52    21:13½

          FRESHMEN

            Half mile        2:22        2:23½
            Mile             5:20        5:22
            Mile and a half  8:06        8:10

          *       *       *       *       *

          TENNIS MATCH

          _Kansas City Star_

          Playing masterful tennis and repeatedly downing
          every attempted rally made by his opponent,
          Clifford J. Lockhorn yesterday defeated Jack
          Cannon, the Kansas City champion, in the finals
          match in the invitation tennis tournament staged on
          the K. C. A. C. courts. Lockhorn’s winning count
          was 6-2, 6-4, 6-2, and, after the finish of the
          first set, at no time did it appear that the local
          crack had a chance to defeat the Cincinnati expert.

          Let it be said in Cannon’s defense that he did not
          play his best game, the game that downed Rolan
          Hoerr in the Missouri Valley tournament last year,
          and the game that made him run Joseph Armstrong a
          hard race for the final title in that classic. The
          courts yesterday were heavy, sogged by the recent
          rains, and Cannon looks best on a fast, light
          ground. And, knowing before he started the first
          set the handicap he was working under, the Kansas
          City star appeared a trifle nervous before play had
          been running long.

          But Lockhorn’s work was marvelous! The crowded
          stand which witnessed every moment of the day’s
          play was applauding his every move as he finished
          up the last set. His head work was perfect, and his
          strokes sure. An easy side-arm shot, apparently
          simple for his opponent to fathom, gained him point
          after point in Cannon’s back court. His direction
          was always good, and clever placements followed
          successively in such lightning-like order that
          Cannon was kept running about the court most of the
          time. And when the new player showed that wonderful
          assurance, verging almost on carelessness, which
          characterized his every move, the crowd was with
          him. They couldn’t help but be.

          Cannon opened up the first set well, taking the
          first game handily on his own serve, after Lockhorn
          had raced it up to deuce twice. The next three went
          to Lockhorn in rapid succession, the “dark horse”
          showing Sphinx-like steadiness on his own serve,
          and passing Cannon repeatedly at the net when the
          local player’s second shot on his own serve would
          be too easily placed. With the score 3-1 against
          him, Cannon braced, and took the fifth game,
          game-thirty, but the spurt was short lived and
          once again Lockhorn started his old sure, steady,
          thoughtful play, running out the next three games,
          and winning the set, 6-2, in clever fashion.

          The second set was perhaps Cannon’s best one. He
          seemed to have lost a trifle of the wildness that
          had marked his opening play, and repeatedly drew
          applause from the gallery for his brilliant returns
          of Lockhorn’s back-line placements. The first six
          games were divided, three and three. Then Lockhorn
          took “seven” and “eight,” raising the score to
          5-3 in his favor. Cannon took the ninth game,
          game-fifteen, on his own serve, but Lockhorn, with
          the possibility of a deuce set facing him, allowed
          Cannon just one point in the last game, and the
          second set ended 6-4, “all his way.”

          The third and deciding set started out like a
          walk-away for the Cincinnati player. Cannon,
          scenting defeat in the air, grew over anxious and
          wild. His own service was frequently off in its
          direction, and he often smashed Lockhorn’s serve
          into the net or the fence, without opening up a
          chance for a volley at which he generally is so
          successful. Lockhorn quickly took five of the first
          six games in this set. The seventh he dropped,
          after he had had match point on Cannon once. But he
          rallied on his own service in the eighth game, and,
          though it went to deuce, he shot two clever drives
          down Cannon’s sidelines for the last two points of
          the set, which gave him the match, 6-2, 6-4, 6-2.

          Lockhorn, the most feared player in Kansas City
          because of his untouted victory over Cannon
          yesterday, is a clever player to watch on the
          courts. He never gets excited, and seems almost
          lazy in the easy indifference with which he plays
          his opponent’s hardest strokes. The highest
          pinnacle of his play has been unexplored by local
          cracks--at least in this tourney. Every time out he
          shows a little more “stuff” and exerts himself just
          enough to beat his next rival.

          Kansas City followers of tennis will watch
          Lockhorn’s work anxiously in the Missouri Valley
          tournament in the fall. Alexander Squair and Walter
          Hayes, R. F. Shelton and J. B. Adoue, jr., Paul
          Darrough and Gene Monett will be there; so will
          Roland Hoerr and Drummond Jones. Perhaps Lockhorn
          may uncover a little of that “old stuff” of his
          then. Kansas City enthusiasts want to see just what
          he has, anyway.

          *       *       *       *       *

          GOLF MATCH

          _Boston Transcript_

          There was nothing of the runaway about this
          morning’s half of the final round for the John
          Shepard, Jr., trophy between Francis Ouimet and
          Paul Tewksbury, chums and both members of the
          Woodland Golf Club, where the match is being
          played. The national amateur champion led by one
          up at the end of the morning play, after a round
          in which the margin at no time was more than two
          holes. They play the final eighteen holes this
          afternoon, and considerably more of a gallery is
          expected than witnessed the play in the morning.

          As a general thing Mr. Ouimet plays the Woodland
          course around 73 to 75 in his matches, but this
          morning he kept out of the 80 class only by a
          single stroke. Mr. Tewksbury had one bad hole, the
          thirteenth, so that his medal was 82. The pair
          halved one hole in 7, which is decidedly unusual
          for them, and another in 6.

          The first hole went to Mr. Ouimet on the strength
          of an exceptionally fine putt, where he faced a
          stymie and had to slice around his opponent’s ball
          to get down in 4. Luck was with the champion at the
          second, where his topped approach rolled through a
          bunker onto the green about ten feet past the hole,
          whence he ran it down for a 3 and became 2 up.
          Neither reached the third green in 2, against the
          wind, and they halved in 5, as was the case also at
          the fourth. Mr. Ouimet required another 5 at the
          fifth, failing to get on from the tee, and then
          taking three putts. He lost that hole and also the
          sixth, where he drove into the woods. This squared
          the match.

          After a succession of four 5s, which in itself is
          decidedly unusual for the champion, he managed to
          get back to normal with a 4 at the seventh, which
          won it; he then played such an accurate approach
          at the eighth that he holed the putt for a 3 and
          became 2 up once more. He pulled one out of bounds
          at the ninth, which cost him the hole and left him
          1 up at the turn.

          They halved the tenth in par 3. Mr. Tewksbury’s
          superior play netted him a 4 at the eleventh,
          which squared the match again. There was something
          spectacular at the twelfth, where Mr. Tewksbury hit
          the cup on an approach shot from the embankment
          above the green and stopped near enough to get down
          his putt for a 4. Mr. Ouimet was off the green
          also on his second, but approached close enough to
          sink his putt for the half. The thirteenth was a
          nightmare to Mr. Tewksbury, who played about four
          shots and then gave up the hole. He had a chance to
          square the match at the fourteenth, where a long
          drive and equally fine second put him within seven
          feet of the hole, but it was a difficult putt and
          he missed his 3.

          The 600-yard fifteenth hole was a stiff
          proposition, owing to the strong wind, and neither
          player got home in 3. Then, singularly enough, they
          took three putts apiece for a half in 7. That was
          in decided contrast to the play at the sixteenth,
          which they halved in 3. To the other long hole,
          the seventeenth, Mr. Ouimet was hole high, but a
          number of yards below the green in 2. His short
          approach was much too strong and he failed to get
          his fourth dead or to hole his putt for a 5. Mr.
          Tewksbury, who was little better situated in 3 than
          Mr. Ouimet in 2, finally had a putt of four feet
          to win the hole. He missed it, and they halved in
          6. Then they halved the home hole in 3. It was a
          striking finish--to halve four successive holes in
          7, 3, 6, 3. Their cards:

            Ouimet     4   3   5    5   5   5   4   3   6--40
            Tewksbury  5   4   5    5   4   4   5   4   5--41
            Ouimet     3   5   4    4   4   7   3   6   3--39--79
            Tewksbury  3   4   4 [I]7   4   7   3   6   3--41--82

            [I] Approximated.




CHAPTER XIV

SOCIETY


Interest in social and personal news is so great that practically
every newspaper maintains a society department under the direction of
a society editor. The form and style suitable to such news are partly
determined by social usage. The typographical style of the society
columns often differs somewhat from that of other parts of the paper.
Society news taxes the writer’s ability to give variety to stories of
the same kind of events as they take place day by day. In no other kind
of news is he more frequently tempted to use stock phrases over and
over again. It is possible, however, to give considerable variety to
society stories as well as to avoid trite, colorless, description.

Unusual courtships, engagements, and weddings may be treated as regular
news; in that case the stories of them are not often placed in the
society section. Such news not infrequently has humorous and pathetic
possibilities that the writer may develop without violating the canons
of good taste.

          *       *       *       *       *

          UNUSUAL COURTSHIP

          _New York Herald_

          Having failed in eight years of effort to find a
          guardian, governess or housekeeper who would take
          a proper interest in his two small motherless
          children, Lorenzo Villette, a prosperous French
          merchant, living at No. 90 North Harwood place,
          Brookbank, decided he would try to find a wife.
          A preliminary search failed to find a suitable
          candidate and he turned to the church, being a
          devout member of St. Anthony’s, in Brookbank.

          Two weeks ago he completed a novena, and on the
          ninth day of his continuous prayer he expressed the
          wish that a wife who would be a good mother would
          be granted to him.

          Nothing happened until the second day after he had
          finished his nine days of prayer. On that day Miss
          Mary O’Connor, of No. 72 Laclede avenue, Brookbank,
          made a social call upon her friend, Miss Frances
          Smith, a cousin of Mr. Villette, in her home, in
          Forest avenue, at Railroad avenue.

          While the two young women talked Miss Smith said to
          her friend:--

          “You seem so downcast recently, Mary. You should
          find a husband.”

          “Yes, I suppose,” was the answer, “but the right
          man has not knocked at the door yet.”

          Just then Mr. Villette rang the bell at his
          cousin’s home. He was introduced to Miss O’Connor
          and an hour later accompanied her to her home.
          Three days later he escorted her to a theatre and
          the following day met her relatives.

          Then she met Mr. Villette’s children and called at
          his home, and last Saturday they obtained a license
          to be married. St. Michael’s Church, which the
          O’Connor family attends, is preparing for one of
          the largest weddings of the season on next Tuesday.

          “I am very happy,” said Miss O’Connor last night,
          “and I am so thankful that Mr. Villette said a
          novena and that I was sent to him.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          UNUSUAL ROMANCE

          _Chicago Inter Ocean_

          Firemen one night last summer stood on the street
          before a blazing apartment building at West
          Fourteenth and South Sangamon streets. They played
          their streams of water on the fire, although they
          realized that the building could not be saved.
          Suddenly from above came the scream of a girl. She
          was seen clinging to a window ledge on the third
          floor before a background of flame.

          That was the beginning of the story.

          Its close came yesterday afternoon within the dim
          and quiet church of St. Francis of Assisi, when the
          girl, Miss Mary Wilkins, became the wife of the man
          who had dared and accomplished her rescue, Arthur
          Sheer, truckman of hook and ladder company No. 5.

          Of all the firemen who stood before the burning
          building that night, Sheer alone volunteered to
          attempt the rescue. A ladder was rushed to the
          red and cracking wall. Blinded by the flames and
          smoke and with his heavy clothing fired from the
          heat, Sheer groped his way up the ladder. His mates
          played streams of water along the course of his
          climb. He reached Miss Wilkins and carried her to
          the street and to safety.

          “And that’s how it was,” the bride said as she
          left the church clinging to the arm of her big and
          blushing husband. “He and I learned to know each
          other after the fire, and--and--well, that’s how it
          was.”

          The blush on Truckman Sheer’s face deepened when
          the interview was directed upon himself.

          “Ah--er--any fireman, you know,” he stammered,
          “would--would--but say, you’d ought to see the
          place we’ve got fixed up. We’re--ah--we’re moving
          in today.”

          The home of the couple will be at 919 West
          Twenty-third place.

          *       *       *       *       *

          COWBOY WEDDING

          _Chicago Herald_

          “Snorky Dan” Sammons tied his pony to the rack at
          the stockyards yesterday, doffed his chaps, wiggled
          into “the conventional black” and, with the able
          assistance of 300 wildly enthusiastic “boys from
          the yards,” was roped, tied and branded at the
          altar.

          It was the biggest “cowboy wedding” the yards ever
          saw. When “Snorky” knocked off buying hogs for the
          Bismark Packing Company early in the day and got
          ready to hit the trail for the Holy Cross Church,
          East Sixty-fifth street and Maryland avenue, he had
          no hint of the scheme on foot.

          Late in the afternoon the South Side, however,
          became aware that there was something doing besides
          the Cubs-Sox battle. First a two-wheeled phaeton,
          dragged along by a gaunt, underfed mule and driven
          by a cowboy, made its appearance. A big banner was
          stretched across its sides giving the bridegroom
          this welcome admonition:

          “Don’t weaken, Snorky.”

          On its heels came a “hungry five” German band
          playing Irish melodies, riding in a “cripple wagon”
          driven by a red-coated negro. A tractor engine,
          pulling a chain of twelve “clean-up” chariots,
          came next, and in its wake a couple of hundred
          yelling, plug-hatted cowboys led by “Rags” Murphy
          and Tom Dorney. As marshals of the “round-up” there
          were “Tex” Hobart, “Jim” McGuirk, “Spuds” Grady
          and “Skinny” Kenny. Even young Edward Morris, who
          recently went to work in the packing business, was
          on the job.

          The cavalcade drew up in front of the church and
          awaited “Snorky.” It was about 5 o’clock when he
          arrived in a big touring car with bride-to-be, Miss
          Mary Cowman, 6876 South Chicago avenue, daughter
          of the late John Cowman, wealthy coal dealer. As
          the party entered the church every noise-making
          device, from the cowboy yell to automobile horns,
          was brought into play.

          While the Rev. D. D. Hishen was “tying the knot”
          inside, the automobile was lassoed. The bridal
          party, upon re-entering the vehicle, attempted to
          make their getaway, but in vain. Surrounded by the
          prancing ponies, they were paraded to the yards at
          Root and Halsted streets, and after “Snorky” had
          made a little speech he was permitted to go.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ELOPEMENT

          _Chicago Herald_

          Just because she was a girl, Charlotte Smith,
          daughter of a Parkhurst contractor, saw no reason
          why she should not learn from her father all about
          building houses on well-located lots.

          Charles Ferris Short, son of a real estate dealer
          in the north shore suburb, had been getting
          information about the value of a piece of ground
          upon which a house could be built.

          What, then, more natural than for Charles, filled
          with knowledge about home locations, and Charlotte,
          wise in the manner of erecting a home and having,
          meanwhile, notions that other persons in the world
          didn’t count for much anyway, to conclude to join
          their knowledge for their own profit?

          Nothing, they agreed. But Charles was only 21 years
          old, and Charlotte 19.

          “Too young,” parents of both agreed.

          Having visions of a piece of property selected by
          him and improved by a house designed by her as a
          place where they, together, would not be annoyed
          by unsympathetic parents, and reading in the
          HERALD that twelve couples had eloped to
          Crown Point Monday to be married, they boarded a
          train for Indiana yesterday. Last night they were
          Mr. and Mrs. Short.

          Charlotte’s parents didn’t know a thing about it
          until told by the HERALD; neither did
          Charles’s people.

          “Oh, well, I guess there’s nothing to do but say
          it’s just fine,” Charlotte’s mother said. “But she
          hasn’t a bit of table linen. We’ll have to get busy
          right away.”

          So it was all right after all.

          Others on the train taken by the Parkhurst couple
          were Peter Felker and Miss Sara Sorley. They
          had planned to be married for some time. It was
          inconvenient to take a honeymoon trip. So they,
          too, eloped to Crown Point.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SEPTUAGENARIAN ROMANCE

          _Chicago Herald_

          More than seventy years ago a barefoot boy and a
          rosy cheeked girl trudged together each day along
          the roads of Albion County, Michigan, to a little
          red school-house, where, at adjoining desks, they
          studied “readin’, ’ritin’ and ’rithmetic.”

          Yesterday the same “boy” and the same “girl” left
          Fair Oaks together for the county building in
          Chicago. There they obtained a marriage license. A
          few minutes later they were married. Thus has Fair
          Oaks furnished its first septuagenarian romance.

          The bridegroom is Rudolph Gray, 77 years old, the
          possessor of two grandchildren. The bride, until
          yesterday, Mrs. Mary J. Vanson, is a year his
          junior. She has three grandchildren.

          After the ceremony the couple returned to the
          residence of the bridegroom’s daughter, Mrs. Clara
          A. Hawkins of 1231 Jenifer avenue, Fair Oaks. There
          the bridegroom told the story of the romance.

          “We’ve known each other as far back as either of us
          can remember,” he said. “We were reared together
          in Albion County, went to the same district school
          together, and later, when we were a little older,
          went to the same dances and parties together.

          “Then our families moved away from Albion County,
          and we lost track of each other for a while. I got
          married and served through the civil war. Sarah
          was married to an Illinois man.

          “Her husband was killed in 1892 in a railroad
          accident, and my first wife died about three years
          ago. A few months ago we learned of each other’s
          whereabouts, started to write back and forth, and
          today were married.”

          The ceremony was performed, according to Mr. Gray,
          by S. M. Schall, in the latter’s office at 118
          North LaSalle street. Later the couple had their
          wedding supper at the Hawkins residence in Fair
          Oaks. In a few days they will leave for Manheim,
          Ill., where they will make their home.

          *       *       *       *       *

          WEDDING

          _New York Times_

          The wedding of Miss Emma Martin Willis, daughter
          of James S. Willis, President of the United States
          Bank of Commerce of this city, and Mrs. Willis,
          and Lesley Green Shafter of Greenville, Penn., was
          celebrated at 8 o’clock last night in St. John’s
          Episcopal Church, Montclair, N. J. The Rev. Dr.
          William R. Bolton, rector of the church, officiated.

          The bride wore a gown of ivory satin and a veil of
          lace, which was caught up with a chaplet of orange
          blossoms. She carried a shower bouquet of white
          orchids and lilies of the valley. Her father gave
          her in marriage.

          The maid of honor was Miss Martha Houghton of
          Calumet, Mich., a former schoolmate of the bride.
          She wore a pink satin gown, draped with tulle and
          net, and carried pink Killarney roses.

          There were six bridesmaids, including the Misses
          Emma Dickens, Elsie Walter, Anna Wilson, Helen
          Holton, Mary Smith, and Katherine Wilkins. They
          were gowned alike, in blue and white chiffon, and
          carried Aaron Ward roses with streamers of blue
          ribbon.

          Clinton M. Shafter was best man for his brother.
          The ushers were George H. Kennedy, John C. Lane,
          Arthur Carpenter, and Dr. James Stratton Collins,
          Jr., of Greenville; Morris B. Lamb of this city,
          and James S. Willis, Jr., of Montclair.

          The church was decorated with autumnal flowers and
          foliage. Along the centre aisle were large clusters
          of white chrysanthemums. Ascension lilies were used
          on the altar.

          More than 200 guests from New York and near-by
          towns attended the reception, which was held after
          the ceremony at the home of the bride, 144 Nedwick
          Avenue, Upper Montclair. The couple received the
          congratulations of their relatives and friends
          under an arbor of pink and white roses in the
          reception room. The house was decorated throughout
          with autumnal foliage and flowers.

          The bride was a pupil at Miss Spence’s School in
          this city in 1909-1910. Mr. Shafter was graduated
          from Williams College, class of ’10, and is a
          member of the Phi Delta Theta Fraternity. His
          father, who died several years ago, was the owner
          of large coal fields and mines, which Mr. Shafter
          has managed since leaving school. Mr. and Mrs.
          Shafter will live in Greenville.

          *       *       *       *       *

          WEDDING

          _Boston Transcript_

          Scarboro, Oct. 23--St. John’s School Chapel was
          the scene of the marriage, at noon today, of Miss
          Violet Otis Gray to John Stanley Hart. Miss Gray is
          the older daughter of Rev. William Green Gray, D.
          D., head of St. John’s School, and Mrs. Gray, who
          was before her marriage Miss Martin. The bride is
          the granddaughter of the late Mr. and Mrs. William
          C. Martin of Boston, who long were summer cottagers
          at Nahant. Herbert F. Martin and Harrison Gray
          Martin are her uncles, and Mrs. Smith of Washington
          and Ipswich, wife of Rev. Richard Otis Smith, D.
          D., is an aunt. Miss Gray has a younger sister,
          Margaret, and four brothers, William G. Gray, Jr.,
          Sigourney Gray, Appleton Gray and Robert Gray. The
          bride made her début three seasons ago.

          Mr. Hart, the bridegroom, is the son of Mr. and
          Mrs. Francis Stanley Hart of Commonwealth avenue,
          Boston, who have a country estate in Bedford. He
          was graduated from Harvard with the class of 1913.
          He is interested in rowing and is a member of the
          Union Boat Club. William A. Hart, of the Harvard
          class of 1915, is a younger brother.

          Dr. Gray, the bride’s father, was the officiating
          clergyman, and gave his daughter in marriage. The
          bride was dressed in a gown of white satin and
          tulle, made with a pointed neck and long, full
          train. It was trimmed with fine old lace, and
          her veil, also of lace, was the one which had
          been worn by her mother, and still earlier by
          her grandmother, Mrs. Martin, on the occasion of
          their weddings. It was held in place with orange
          blossoms. The bridal bouquet was of lilies of the
          valley, white orchids and delicate ferns.

          The younger sister, Miss Margaret Gray, was flower
          girl and wore a high-waisted dress of white net
          with embroidered ruffles, with which was worn a
          small hat of pink satin trimmed with lace and
          pink rosebuds. She carried pale pink roses. The
          bridesmaids were Miss Elizabeth Howard of Boston,
          cousin of the bridegroom; Miss Anna Appleton Graves
          of South Orange, N. J., and Miss Mary Appleton
          of New York. Miss Graves and Miss Appleton are
          the bride’s cousins. These three attendants were
          dressed in pale pink taffeta with sleeves and long
          tunics of pink tulle. They wore large flat hats
          of dark blue velvet and carried bunches of pink
          rosebuds mixed with bluets. Mrs. Gray, the bride’s
          mother, wore dark blue silk and a hat of dark blue
          velvet trimmed with feathers of the same shade.

          Frederic Hart of Boston, Harvard, ’13, a cousin
          of the bridegroom, was best man, and those who
          served as ushers were Charles Pelham Morgan, Jr.,
          Harvard, ’14; Edwin Curtis, Harvard, ’13; Wilkins
          Frothingham, Harvard, ’13; George William Meyer,
          Jr., Harvard, ’13; Bayard Tyler, Harvard, ’13;
          Tudor Jenkins, Harvard, ’13; Richard Courtland,
          Harvard, ’16; George Bartlett, Harvard, ’13;
          Sigourney Gray, Amherst, ’18, brother of the bride.

          *       *       *       *       *

          WEDDING

          _New York Herald_

          Southern smilax and palms made the background
          for the bower of white and pink cut flowers and
          plants ornamenting the chancel of the Church of the
          Divine Paternity last Tuesday when Miss Florence
          I. Gardiner, daughter of Mrs. Curtis Gardiner, of
          No. 949 West Eighty-fifth street, was married to
          Mr. Frederick Guild Jenkins, Jr., the Rev. Dr. Hall
          officiating.

          The bride wore a gown of ivory white satin trimmed
          with pearls and embroidered with orange blossoms
          with court train of chiffon and satin. Instead
          of a veil she wore a cap of princess lace, and
          she carried a bouquet of lilies of the valley and
          white orchids. She was attended by her sister,
          Mrs. Deland Roswell Morton, who wore a gown of
          pink satin trimmed with brown lace and beaver fur,
          with picture hat to match; she carried Killarney
          roses. Little Ruth and Virginia Gardiner, the
          flower girls, wore frocks of white lingerie with
          pink sashes, and carried white French baskets of
          sunburst roses.

          Mr. David Pelham was best man, and the ushers were
          Messrs. John Burton, Harrison Kneeland and John J.
          Surl, of this city, and Harold Warren, of Fishkill,
          N. Y. After the ceremony Mr. and Mrs. Jenkins
          started on a wedding trip through the South.

          *       *       *       *       *

          WEDDING

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          WASHINGTON, Dec. 3.--Miss Emily Curtis, daughter
          of Mr. and Mrs. William T. Curtis, was married
          today to Captain William Raines Darlington, Coast
          Artillery, United States army. The ceremony took
          place at the home of the bride’s parents in
          Georgetown. The Rev. D. H. Markham officiated. The
          attendants were Miss Winifred Deland and Captain
          Robert Bruce Scott, U. S. A. The latter and the
          bridegroom wore full uniform. The bride wore white
          satin, with tulle overdress, and a tulle veil.
          Following a wedding breakfast, Captain and Mrs.
          Darlington left for the South, the former being
          stationed at Fort Garfield, Ga.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ENGAGEMENT

          _Chicago Post_

          Mrs. Francis T. Calkins, 1253 Hamilton avenue,
          announces the engagement of her youngest daughter,
          Imogen Hammond, to Mr. Percy Chapman, son of Mr.
          and Mrs. A. L. Chapman, 3024 Sigourney street.

          Miss Calkins’s father was the late Colonel Francis
          T. Calkins, first colonel of the Seventeenth
          Regiment, I. N. G. The bride elect is president of
          the Delta Gamma Mu Sorority and a member of the
          Beta Phi Epsilon Sorority. Mr. Chapman is a member
          of the Delta Omicron Fraternity and is known in
          athletic circles. No date has been set for the
          wedding.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ENGAGEMENT

          _New York Times_

          The engagement of Miss Agnes P. Colby and Frederick
          E. Chandler has been announced. Miss Colby is the
          daughter of the Rev. Dr. J. Wilson Colby, the noted
          evangelist, with whom she made a globe-encircling
          trip several years ago. She is spending the Winter
          with her aunt, Mrs. Charles Stratton Wilce, at
          Springfield, Mass.

          Mr. Chandler is a graduate of Williams College,
          class of ’12, and is a Director in the Industrial
          Bonding Corporation of New York. The wedding is to
          take place in the early Spring at the Colby home at
          Jamaica Estates, L. I.

          *       *       *       *       *

          WEDDING PARTY DINNER DANCE

          _New York Times_

          Mrs. Ralph H. Devine, whose brother, Harry Curtis
          Livingston of Cleveland, Ohio, is to marry Miss
          Hope Alexander, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. W. A.
          Alexander, tomorrow afternoon in the Church of the
          Heavenly Rest, entertained last night at the St.
          Regis in honor of Miss Alexander and her fiancé.

          Covers were laid for twenty-six guests, and the
          table was decorated with lilies of the valley
          and pink roses. Silver bonbon boxes were given
          as favors. The guests included some of the girl
          friends of the bride-elect, the best man, Frederick
          R. Devine, and the ushers, Sidney Dillon, Arthur
          G. Alexander, Benjamin Noyes, Martin Otis Tilden,
          Harrison Prescott, and Frederick Cheever.

          There was informal dancing afterward, for which a
          few additional guests were invited.

          *       *       *       *       *

          COLLEGE FRATERNITY DINNER

          _Topeka Capitol_

          The Kappa Sigma men of Washburn college celebrated
          Founders’ day with a dinner at the Mills tea
          room yesterday evening. The men of the active
          chapter, Gamma Nu, and many of the local alumni
          gathered together for the fraternity’s forty-fifth
          anniversary. It was on December 10, just forty-five
          years ago, that the fraternity, now the largest in
          number of chapters, was founded at the University
          of Virginia.

          The tables were decorated with the fraternity
          flower, lily of the valley, and the colors,
          scarlet, white and emerald. Toasts, with Mr. Earl
          Trobert acting as toastmaster, were responded to
          by Mr. William Whitcomb, for the pledges, Mr.
          Merrill Ream, for the actives, Mr. James Coleman,
          on the “Fraternity Relations to the Alumnus,” Mr.
          Monte Kistler, on “Fraternity Expansion,” Dr. A.
          B. Jeffrey, on “Internal Development,” and Mr. W.
          K. Miller, on “The Why of a Greek.” The fraternity
          songs were sung as a finishing touch.

          The Kappa Sigmas at the affair were: Mr. Monte
          Kistler, Mr. Irwin Keller, Mr. Clayton Kline, Mr.
          Robert Drum, Mr. James Coleman, Dr. A. B. Jeffrey,
          Mr. W. W. Miller, Mr. D. Elton McIntosh, Mr.
          Kenneth Kline, Mr. Dwight Ream, Mr. Merrill Ream,
          Mr. Wayne Cook, Mr. Robert Whitcomb, Mr. Richard
          Whitcomb, Mr. Earl Trobert, Mr. Warren Humphrey,
          Mr. Charles Kesler, Mr. Robert Ward, Mr. Russell
          Swiler, Mr. John Ripley, Mr. Clifford Olander, Mr.
          Forest Rice, Mr. Duane Van Horn, Mr. Elwin Olander,
          Mr. Ned Brown, Mr. Edwin Tucker, Mr. Harold Cone,
          Mr. William Whitcomb, Mr. John March, Mr. Ray
          Enfield, Mr. Jay Jenson and Mr. Jackson Brown.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHRISTMAS DINNER REUNION

          _Chicago Herald_

          Mr. and Mrs. Frank Hinton of 891 East Twenty-first
          street will give the annual dinner for members of
          the Hinton family Christmas night. This will be the
          sixty-fourth Christmas dinner and reunion in the
          Hinton family. Among those who will be present are
          Mr. and Mrs. Thomas M. Hinton, State’s Attorney and
          Mrs. Maclay Hinton, Mr. and Mrs. Clifford Whitcomb,
          Mrs. Gertrude Hinton Humphrey and Mrs. Charles C.
          Coleman. Covers will be laid for thirty-five.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ANNOUNCEMENT OF DINNER PARTY

          _Chicago Herald_

          Miss Camille Russell Ward of 1891 Grand boulevard,
          who made her début Thanksgiving day, will give a
          dinner Sunday in honor of Miss Irene Rice, daughter
          of Mr. and Mrs. Robert G. Rice of 3736 Elton
          avenue, who is to be married Dec. 29 to Edmund
          Cook, son of Dr. and Mrs. E. Walton Cook.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DANCE FOR CHARITY

          _Chicago Herald_

          Hungry babies will be fed, and the coffers of at
          least a dozen South Side day nurseries will be
          filled, from the proceeds of the annual ball of the
          Friendly Aid Society to be given Monday evening
          at the Blackstone Hotel. Mrs. Edward E. Hammond
          is president of the society. The beneficiaries
          include Bethlehem Creche, Chicago Refuge for Girls,
          Children’s South Side Free Dispensary, Home for
          Convalescent Women and Children, Home for Destitute
          Crippled Children, Jackson Park Sanitarium, Legal
          Aid Society, Margaret Etter Creche, Stockyards Day
          Nursery, Boys’ Shelter, Visiting Nurses and the
          Juvenile Protective Association.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SORORITY’S FORMAL PARTY

          _Kansas City Star_

          The spring formal of the Kappa Alpha Theta Sorority
          was given in F. A. A. Hall Friday evening. The
          chapter president, Miss Elsa Bartell, and the house
          mother, Mrs. Anna Stratton, headed the receiving
          line. A very clever electrical effect was carried
          out in the sorority colors, gold and black. Kansas
          City guests were Mr. Emmett Donnet, Mr. Arthur Dix,
          Mr. James Sampson, Mr. Carl Bright, Mr. Edward Dix,
          Mr. Robert Campbell, Mr. Harland Hamilton, Mr.
          Albert Rook, Mr. George Bright, Mr. Ivan Bean, Mr.
          Ben Sweet, Mr. Charles Hagen and Mr. Richard Smith.
          Kansas City Thetas are: Miss Marie Hedrick, Miss
          Emma Mae Root, Miss Katherine Kiezer, Miss Louisa
          Hedrick, Miss Helen Tompkins, Miss Barbara Martin,
          Miss Marjorie Hile, Miss Mable Perkins, Miss Elsa
          McClure, Miss Ida Perry, Miss Caroline Nutt, Miss
          Virginia Gray and Miss Josephine Stone.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CLUB DANCE

          _New York Herald_

          A dance for the members of the Colony Club will
          be given in the Marseilles Hotel to-morrow night.
          The patronesses will include Mmes. Edward Burton
          Williams, William Grant Brown, Emma Kip Edwards, H.
          W. Harding, Hartwell B. Grubb, William L. Sands,
          Edward Donnelly, Harry Grimes and Upton Slingluff,
          and Misses Florence Guernsey and Ella L. Henderson.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DANCING PARTY

          _Chicago Herald_

          Mr. and Mrs. Frederick W. Maxwell of West Walton
          place gave a dance last night at the Chicago Latin
          School for their daughter, Miss Rosalie Maxwell,
          and her young friends at home from school for the
          holidays.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MUSICALE

          _Chicago Post_

          Mrs. Lamson Neil Pelham of Evanston entertained a
          number of guests at a musical this afternoon at 3
          o’clock at her home, 1460 Appleton avenue. She was
          assisted by Mrs. Henry P. Parker and Mrs. Walter
          W. White. The artists were Mr. Heath Gregory, who
          gave a group of songs, and Mr. Theodore du Moulin,
          cellist of the Chicago Orchestra, with Mr. Shynman
          as accompanist. The house was prettily decorated
          and in every room there were masses of flowers and
          pots of heather.

          *       *       *       *       *

          COLLEGE ALUMNAE MEETING

          _Chicago Herald_

          The regular meeting of the Chicago Alumnae
          Association of Kappa Kappa Gamma will be held Dec.
          30, in room A of the Chicago College Club. Mrs.
          L. J. Lamson will talk during the tea hour on the
          work and needs of the Margaret Etter Creche, which
          was founded by Mary F. Etter, a Kappa of Epsilon
          Chapter. Miss Louise Merrill, a former president of
          this association, will pour.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ANNOUNCEMENT OF LUNCHEON

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          Mrs. Seymour Thornton has issued cards for a
          luncheon at the Ritz-Carlton, to be followed by a
          matinee theatre party, Saturday, December 19, in
          honor of Miss Elinor Judd Wilson, the débutante
          daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles H. Wilson. Among
          the guests will be Mrs. Charles H. Wilson, Mrs.
          Joseph B. Melton, Miss Katharine Torrey, Miss
          Marjorie Deland, Miss Eleanor B. Robinson, Miss
          Ethel Hastings, Miss Frances Tyler, Miss Elizabeth
          C. Jenkins, Miss Eleanore Curtis, Miss Elizabeth E.
          Mills, Miss Helena Rawlins, Miss Christine Rice and
          Miss Edith Harrold.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ANNOUNCEMENT OF THEATRE PARTY

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          Dr. and Mrs. T. Bradford Cotton have sent out
          invitations for a theatre party, followed by
          supper, at their home, 1802 Ashbury place, Monday
          night. Miss Hilda Taylor, the débutante daughter of
          Mr. and Mrs. Thomas R. Taylor, of Medina, is to be
          the guest of honor and the other guests are to be
          débutantes and men of the younger set to the number
          of 18.

          *       *       *       *       *

          THEATRE PARTY

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          Mr. and Mrs. James Francis Cheltenham gave a
          theatre party last night in honor of Miss Margaret
          Rand, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Augustus Rand.
          Afterwards the guests were entertained at a supper
          at the Ritz-Carlton.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CARD PARTY

          _Kansas City Star_

          Mr. and Mrs. Grant Milton Coffey entertained with
          an auction bridge party Friday evening, at which
          the engagement of their sister, Marion Perkins
          Clark, to Dr. Earl Bispam was announced. The place
          cards were water colored sketches of Cupid carrying
          envelopes in which were the announcements. Favors
          were won by Miss Eugenia Devine, Mrs. J. W. Harter,
          Dr. Earl Bispam and Mr. Benjamin G. Root. Guests
          were limited to the friends of Miss Clark.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CARD PARTY

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          A “500” party will be given by the feminine members
          of the Valley Green Canoe Club in the clubhouse
          Saturday afternoon at 3 o’clock, to be followed by
          a buffet supper and dancing in the evening. The
          entertainment will mark the opening of the new
          English grill room, where the dancing will take
          place, and also the new library and reception hall.
          The members who have charge of the affair are: Mrs.
          James Perkins, Mrs. Edmund Chynoweth, Miss Bessie
          Maxwell, Miss Irene Carter, Miss Margaret Creig and
          Miss Mabel N. Donaldson.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DÉBUTANTE’S PARTY

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          Miss Elsa Catlin, débutante daughter of Mr. and
          Mrs. Theodore W. Catlin, will be the guest of
          honor at a party which John Wilkins Frothingham,
          Jr., of School House lane, Germantown, will give
          at The Rabbit tomorrow night. The chaperones will
          be Mrs. Catlin and Miss Sarah Wilkins Frothingham,
          the latter the sister of the host. The guests will
          be Miss Charlotte Harding, Miss Virginia Racine,
          Miss Emilie P. Jackson, Miss Josephine Wooton, Miss
          Alice Thompson, Miss Margaret Burton, Miss Cordelia
          Brown, Miss Pauline Dickens, Albert E. Kennedy,
          Jr., William Barry, Rodney N. Land, Harry R. Neil,
          John C. Bell, Jr., Thomas K. Fenton, Jr., Alexander
          Mercer, Jr., Joseph G. B. Renton, John B. Knox, 2d,
          Barclay Wood, Lewis Smith and Andrew Van Brunt.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ENTERTAINMENTS FOR DISTINGUISHED GUEST

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          Mrs. Pethick Lawrence will be given several
          entertainments during her stay in this city. A
          reception will be held for her tonight at the home
          of Miss Mary McMurtrie, 1104 Spruce street. Those
          who will receive with Miss McMurtrie and Mrs.
          Lawrence will be Mrs. Edward Troth, Miss Anne H.
          Wharton, the writer, Mrs. Edward Parker Davis, Mrs.
          Morris Jastrow, Mrs. Francis D. Patterson and Mrs.
          Thomas F. Kirkbride.

          Mrs. Lawrence will be the guest of Mrs. H. H.
          Donaldson over Sunday.

          *       *       *       *       *

          VISIT

          _Chicago Herald_

          Ensign and Mrs. Wilson K. Spring of Boston are
          visiting their parents, Colonel and Mrs. Taylor E.
          Spring, at 9652 Kenwood avenue. Mrs. W. K. Spring
          was Miss Florence Berwin before her marriage last
          August. They will return immediately after New
          Year’s to join Ensign Spring’s ship “Oklahoma,”
          which will sail early in January for Cuba.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ENTERTAINMENTS FOR GLEE CLUB

          _Chicago Post_

          The program to be rendered this year by the Harvard
          Musical Clubs on Wednesday evening, Dec. 30, at
          8:15 o’clock, in Orchestra Hall, is an especially
          attractive one. The Glee Club, which last year
          distinguished itself by winning a competitive
          glee club meet in New York, occupies the central
          position. Three Chicago men are making the tour
          this year. They are Mr. Arthur Dee, 3d, of Oak
          Park, Mr. S. P. Priestley and Mr. D. H. Curtis, who
          was this year chosen assistant manager of the clubs.

          Following the concert Mrs. John Cotton Barclay, 240
          Lake Shore drive, will give a dance at her home in
          honor of the members of the clubs. As the dance
          this year is to take place in a private home, the
          invitations are limited. Mrs. Barclay’s son, Mr.
          Burton Barclay, is a Harvard man, and his roommate,
          Mr. Charles Brunswick of Detroit, formerly of
          Chicago, is a member of the Glee Club and will take
          part in the concert.

          Mrs. Charles C. Graves, 1404 Oaklawn place, will be
          among those giving dinners before the concert.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ENTERTAINMENT FOR CHARITY

          _New York Times_

          Announcement has just been made of the débutantes
          and members of the younger generation in society
          who are to take part in the annual entertainment
          for charity of the Junior League, which is to be
          held on three nights, beginning Monday, Jan. 25,
          at the Waldorf-Astoria. This entertainment is
          always the culmination of the formal season for
          the débutantes who make up the membership of the
          League, and it is largely attended by society.

          The entertainment is to be called “Le Jour Férie,”
          (“The Holiday,”) and besides a programme of dances,
          there will be booths and a soda water fountain,
          presided over by one of the débutantes of the
          season. Rehearsals for the dances have been in
          progress for some time at the homes of Mrs. C. B.
          Alexander, Mrs. John Jacob Astor, Mrs. R. Fulton
          Cutting, and Mrs. William J. Schieffelin.

          Mrs. Courtlandt Nicoll of 405 Park Avenue is in
          charge of the sale of tickets.

          There is to be a carnival procession, after which
          the special dances will be shown. Miss Mary J.
          Schieffelin is Chairman of the Irish dance, in
          which the Misses Lillian Talmage, Sylvia Holt,
          Eunice Clapp, Josephine Wells, Marie Thayer,
          Eugenie Rand, Rita Boker, Margaret Erhart, and an
          equal number of young men are to take part.

          In the mirror dance will be Mrs. Walter Stillman,
          Miss Beatrice G. Pratt, William Boulton, Jr.,
          Lynford Dickinson, and Horace Allen.

          Miss Mary Alexander is Chairman of the Pierrot
          dance, in which are to appear Mrs. John Rutherford,
          and the Misses Elsie Stevens, Marie Tailer, Carol
          Harriman, Muriel Winthrop, Ethel Crocker, John
          Elliot, Schuyler Parsons, Bradish J. Carroll,
          Jr., Stuyvesant Chanler, Suydam Cutting, George
          Rushmore, and Reginald Rives.

          In the Russian dance, of which Miss Edith Mortimer
          is Chairman, Mrs. Louis W. Noël and the Misses
          Alexandra Emery and Lisa Stillman, with Anderson
          Dana, George B. Post, Jr., Auguste Noël, Maurice
          Roche, Gerald Murphy, and Edward Shippen are to
          appear.

          Miss Margaret Trevor is in charge of the dance
          called “Moment Musicale,” Miss Mary Canfield is
          head of the Gavotte dance, and Miss Frances Breese
          and Marie Louise Emmet have organized the Harlequin
          dance. Miss Eugenie Philbin is Chairman of the
          Frivolité dance, in which there will be a fancy
          fox trot. Miss Florence Blair heads the list in
          the Spanish dance, while Miss Josephine Nicoll is
          Chairman of the Saltorella dance and Miss Gladys
          Fries of the Tyrolean dance.

          Fifty society girls, many of them débutantes, and
          as many young society men are to take part in the
          carnival procession.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CHARITY BAZAAR

          _New York Herald_

          Members of the Universal Sunshine Society,
          foreseeing the demand that will be made this winter
          by the poor in New York for help, are devoting
          their energies to their annual bazaar, which is to
          be held in the McAlpin Hotel on the afternoon and
          evening of Tuesday. Mrs. Florence Hart Jerome is
          chairman of the sale.

          A feature of the bazaar will be the flag exhibit at
          the Peace and Plenty table, with the official peace
          flag and autographed photograph of the President
          which will become the property of the person who
          takes the flag. Mrs. Clarence Burns, president,
          Mrs. Jane Pierce, general secretary, and branch
          presidents will preside over the various tables.
          These will be:--Aprons, Mrs. C. D. Baldwin; tea
          table, served by actresses; refreshments, Mmes.
          Damon Lyon, M. B. Gates, Stuart Smith and J. J.
          Coudrey, and the Misses R. Burlingham, M. Loughey
          and M. Mutterer; fancy table, Mrs. F. H. Dean and
          the Misses Eva Bolger and Edna Schoneck; flower
          table, Mrs. H. G. Kost and the Misses Helen Kost,
          Leonore Erikson, Sadie Spencer, Helen Gibbons,
          Alma Wolfe, Margaret Davies, H. Nealy, F. L. Hurt
          and L. H. Macdonald; candy table, Mrs. S. J.
          Scherer; home made cake table, Mrs. R. G. Spencer
          and the “In Memoriam” branch, of Brooklyn, Miss M.
          de Comps and small children. Miss Victorine Hayes
          will sing during the evening. The bazaar will open
          at two o’clock and continue until midnight.




CHAPTER XV

MISCELLANEOUS LOCAL NEWS


=Type of story.= Although most local events have been included in
the various classes of stories discussed in preceding chapters, there
remain several forms of city news that require separate consideration.
Much interesting, timely information is to be found in schools, public
libraries, museums, parks, and various departments of city government.
As activities supported by public money, these institutions should be
of interest to every citizen. Real estate, building, manufacturing,
and business matters also furnish news of considerable interest and
importance. Besides this information, there are many little incidents
in the daily life of every city that have no significance as news
but that can be written up as entertaining stories. Hotels, railroad
stations, docks, and street cars are frequently the scenes of little
comedies and tragedies that the reporter with keen insight into human
life and with ability to portray them, turns into readable sketches.
Animals no less than persons may be the central figures in these
stories.

=Purpose.= The aim in one class of these local stories is to
furnish timely, significant information in attractive form concerning
public institutions and business activities. The purpose of the other
class is to entertain the reader with little glimpses of the life of
the city. Constructive journalism undertakes to stimulate the interest
of every citizen in municipal affairs and in public institutions
by putting prominently before him from time to time significant
information about them.

The utmost accuracy in presenting information of public affairs and
business matters, it is needless to say, is absolutely essential. It
is important to maintain the same standard of truthfulness in writing
entertaining feature stories, not because their contents are of vital
importance, but because a newspaper, in order to command the confidence
of its readers, cannot present anything in its news columns that is not
true. Fictitious details are no more justifiable in feature stories
than in news stories.

=Treatment.= In order to interest the average reader in news
of various municipal activities it is necessary to make the stories
attractive in form and style. Striking facts and figures or unusual
statements, featured at the beginning, catch the reader’s eye and lead
him to read the story as long as its subject matter and style interest
him. Effective use of statistics and comparisons is shown in the story
“Public Schools Open,” p. 233. Two stories that begin with unusual
statements are those entitled “School for Backward Children,” p. 235,
and “New Feature in Manufacturing,” p. 243.

Since there is practically no news interest in entertaining feature
stories, the reader’s attention is attracted and held by the way
in which the story is told. Narrative and descriptive beginnings,
conversation, suspense, humor and other devices used in short stories
and novels are well adapted to these news stories.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NOTE--_The following story was published
          some years before the European War._

          PUBLIC SCHOOLS OPEN

          _New York World_

          There trooped into the public schools of New York
          yesterday an army without weapons that in numbers
          exceeded the great military force of the German
          Empire, with its 613,000 fighting men; that was
          greater than the standing army of France, with its
          force of 529,000 available soldiers, and that more
          than doubled Great Britain’s defenders.

          The school-house doors of the consolidated city
          were thrown open to 625,000 pupils, commanded by
          17,000 teachers, or a greater number of commanders
          than now direct the movements of the combined
          military forces of the three powerful nations in
          the world.

          The United States Army, with its 70,000 men and
          officers, is a little more than one-tenth of this
          multitude. The entire budget of the War Department,
          which includes a vast expenditure outside of actual
          expense for the maintenance of the army posts in
          time of peace, was $103,000,000 last year. New
          York’s Board of Education, which in 1907 spent
          $19,845,870 for teachers’ salaries alone, has asked
          this year for $31,641,326.75 to carry out its plans
          for providing additional accommodations for pupils.

          The maintenance on a peace footing of Japan’s
          army of 220,000 men, which is a little more than
          one-third of New York’s army of school children,
          will cost $35,000,000 or $40,000,000 at the most.
          The pay of a New York Superintendent of Schools is
          greater than the pay of a German general, and only
          slightly below that of a British commander of equal
          rank.

          The eight associate superintendents in New York
          command larger brigades than any of the officers of
          equal rank in France, Germany or Austria-Hungary.

          Public School No. 1, which is located in the most
          populous centre in the city--Catherine, Oliver and
          Henry streets--and which has 2,800 pupils on its
          roster, was thrown open at 9 o’clock yesterday
          morning. There is no other school like it in
          Manhattan, and its opening always has attracted the
          interest of educators.

          In the boys’ department, during exercises, the
          principal cautioned the boys that only boys over
          ten would be allowed to sell newspapers, after
          school hours, and that each must get a license to
          do it.

          “We are exceedingly crowded in the first grade,”
          said Mr. Veit, “but I do not think the school
          has greatly increased in numbers. The removal of
          houses for the erection of the Manhattan end of the
          Manhattan Bridge has taken out many families.

          “We have four Chinese boys in this school. Teachers
          would never have nervous prostration if they had
          Chinese boys to teach. They have great respect and
          reverence for their teachers.”

          All registration figures were broken in the Bronx,
          and when the schools opened every seat was filled.
          At the Morris High School, One Hundred and Sixth
          street and Boston road, of which John H. Denbeigh
          is principal, there were about three hundred new
          applicants. Mr. Denbeigh expects there will be
          about two thousand seven hundred pupils.

          There was a distinct innovation in the inauguration
          of a school for deaf mutes in the old High School
          Building, at No. 235 East Twenty-third street.
          Superintendent Maxwell is greatly interested in
          the prospective work of the school. Although there
          are many deaf mute children, unschooled, in New
          York City, there were only sixty-five registered
          yesterday, owing to the fact that few persons knew
          that a deaf mutes’ school was to be opened.

          Annie Hamilton, “stone deaf,” who a year ago could
          not distinguish a word or articulate a sound, was
          brought to the new school by an older brother.

          Miss Regan extended her hand to the child and said:
          “Good morning, Annie; how are you?”

          “Very well, thank you,” the child replied,
          indistinctly.

          Miss Regan smiled and shook her head. Then she
          placed a finger at the child’s thorax and indicated
          that the vibrations were not as they should be.

          “What is your name?” she asked.

          “Annie Hamilton.” This time the reply was quite
          plain.

          The questions of the teacher were understood by the
          reading of the lips.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NEW SCHOOLS

          _Chicago Herald_

          Two agencies designed to add to a boy’s “chance in
          the world” were opened in Chicago yesterday. One
          of them intends to train children in the rudiments
          of the art of earning a living; the other hopes
          to reclaim those who, through lack of economic
          equipment, have stumbled and fallen.

          The first is the Pullman Free School of Manual
          Training, created under the terms of the will of
          George M. Pullman, millionaire car builder. The
          second is the vocational school for prisoners at
          the bridewell.

          Ninety children, two-thirds of whom were boys,
          enrolled at the Pullman school. It is designed to
          provide free industrial training for those to whom
          circumstances otherwise might have denied it.

          The bridewell school is operated in conjunction
          with the psychopathic hospital. Its plans
          were explained yesterday by John L. Whitman,
          superintendent of the prison.

          “Many of the petty offenders against law are
          mental defectives,” he said. “Lacking mental grasp
          and manual efficiency, they soon find that the
          industrial world has no place open for them. The
          next step is crime. His sentence at the bridewell
          over, the boy returns to the world. Thus society
          punishes without removing the cause of the
          individual’s wrongdoing.

          “By opening this school we hope so to train these
          boys that when they return to the world they
          will, by virtue of the training received at the
          bridewell, have at least the chance to do right.”

          The enrollment at the bridewell school yesterday
          was twenty-five. It is a small beginning for a
          big ideal. The Pullman school is a big beginning
          for an even more worthy ideal--making the need of
          “reclaiming” unnecessary.

          Mr. Pullman’s will contained a bequest of
          $1,250,000, to be used as a trust fund for the
          establishment of the school, his life’s dream.
          Trustees under the will invested the money wisely,
          for it since has grown until at present it
          aggregates more than $3,000,000.

          Under the terms of the bequest the school is open
          free to “the children of persons living in or
          employed at Pullman.” Thus its benefits are not
          restricted to children of employes of the Pullman
          Company.

          The courses to be taught will include cabinet
          work, pattern-making, blacksmithing, foundry work,
          machine shop work, electric construction and steam
          and electric operating, engineering, English,
          mathematics, drawing and household arts and
          sciences.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SCHOOL FOR BACKWARD CHILDREN

          _Kansas City Star_

          “Dummy! Dummy! Gee, but you’re a dummy!”

          There are from 1,500 to 2,000 “dummies” in the
          public schools of Kansas City, it is estimated.
          They are the boys and girls who can’t have anything
          “drummed into their heads” and so are the laughing
          stock of their classmates. Between five and six
          hundred of them are feeble minded. A large per
          cent of the “dummies,” however, are not all around
          “dummies” and might be saved from becoming feeble
          minded and a menace to society.

          “What are you going to do with them?”

          That is the question Dr. E. L. Mathias, chief
          probation officer, is asking Kansas City.

          “Kansas City has got to wake up to the situation,”
          said Doctor Mathias yesterday afternoon, in
          discussing the report of the Juvenile Protective
          Association of Chicago. A resume of the report was
          printed in The Star of June 10. In that article the
          statement was made by one authority that the menace
          of the feeble minded was even more grave than a
          foreign war or a native pestilence.

          “Kansas City is sixteen years behind the times
          in taking up this problem,” continued Doctor
          Mathias. “Boston was the first city to provide
          special training for its backward and feeble minded
          children. Other cities have followed suit and
          Kansas City must do the same. If numerous surveys
          in other cities have revealed a ratio of one feeble
          minded person to every 250 it is reasonable to
          suppose that a like condition exists in Kansas City.

          “Most of the backward children in the schools are
          retarded by some physical defect or taint of feeble
          mindedness. A very small number of the mental
          defectives ought to be in institutions. But the
          largest per cent of the retarded children could be
          saved by being given special training in separate
          classes.

          “The entire problem of the feeble minded is even
          more serious. Little can be done with the adults,
          except to place them in institutions. Yet much can
          be done with the present generation by directing
          the minds of the mental defectives into useful
          channels so that they will not become a burden on
          the community and a menace to society.”

          The board of education is considering the problem
          and probably will start next fall in a small way
          with a separate class room and expert teachers.

          *       *       *       *       *

          READING IN SCHOOLS

          _Christian Science Monitor_

          Reading is to be given especial attention in the
          public schools of Boston again this winter in the
          hope that next June will see the finest lot of
          readers the schools of the city have ever produced.

          Five points are to be especially observed: 1.
          Correct pronunciation of words at an acceptable
          rate of speed; 2. Expression of the meaning of what
          is read; 3. Distinct reading; 4. Pleasing use of
          the voice; 5. Ability to get the meaning of what is
          read silently.

          Silent reading ability is to be made a point of
          special attention, as it calls for the application
          of the child’s mind to definite reasoning, which
          will in turn develop his mental powers.

          In a circular now being sent out to masters
          of elementary districts by the assistant
          superintendent in charge, Mrs. Ellor Carlisle
          Ripley, and approved by Superintendent Dyer, they
          are requested to repeat this year the general plan
          pursued last year for increasing the interest in
          oral reading. They are then asked to devise ways
          and means of increasing the child’s power to get
          ideas from paragraphs read silently. The result is
          expected to be two fold--to make more intelligent
          and pleasing oral reading, and to develop in
          children a fondness for reading when it is done
          without the companionship of others.

          As last year there are to be reading contests. On
          two occasions in the course of this school year
          in all grades above the third the children will
          hear, in their school hall or some other selected
          place, readers from their respective rooms. These
          readers are to be selected by means that will tend
          to improve the reading of all the pupils.

          It is desired that the first series of readings
          will be concluded by Dec. 23 of this year, and that
          the second series be held during the week beginning
          March 27 next.

          No centralized arrangement will be made this year
          for sending trained readers to the schools, but as
          all colleges of reading have expressed themselves
          as very ready to co-operate with the schools, it is
          believed the masters can secure readers at desired
          times.

          Inter-district readings will begin April 25 and
          continue to June 1. Each school is requested to
          send one reader and one alternate reader to the
          inter-district reading assigned to his school. At
          these readings each child will be allowed three
          minutes for reading a familiar section supplied by
          his school. Sight reading will also be furnished
          and brief tests of silent reading will be made.

          *       *       *       *       *

          READING TESTS IN SCHOOLS

          _Chicago Herald_

          In the little red schoolhouse, if Johnnie was slow
          in reading he was put in a corner, where he held a
          ponderous volume, if he escaped corporal punishment.

          Now if Johnnie is a pupil in the elementary
          department of the school of education at the
          University of Chicago he is sent to the reading
          clinic of Dr. C. Truman Gray.

          Dr. Gray, former reading expert at the University
          of Texas, has been selected by Director Charles
          H. Judd to conduct an investigation here financed
          by the general education board of New York.
          Dr. Abraham Flexner, head of the Rockefeller
          educational body, is watching the investigation
          with interest.

          At Dr. Gray’s clinic Johnnie will spend half an
          hour a day for five days. After Johnnie’s teacher
          has given Dr. Gray all the information she can
          about his vision, hearing, breathing and attention
          Johnnie will be given some reading tests.

          When Johnnie has read several prose selections,
          each of increased difficulty; several bits of
          poetry of a similar gradation, and a bit of oratory
          he will be given a set of printed questions,
          to which he will write the answers, and then a
          number of printed stories, which he will read and
          reproduce.

          A careful record of Johnnie’s time and his number
          of errors on each of these experiments will be kept.

          Then Johnnie will be ready for the machines. He
          will be taken into a darkened room and a printed
          selection will be projected on a screen. As Johnnie
          reads the selection a blank phonograph record
          will record his performance, an elaborate camera
          will take pictures of his eye movements, and an
          instrument fastened over his chest will record his
          breathing.

          A camera shutter device on the projecting machine
          will make it possible for the light to be shut off
          the screen at any point, and the number of words he
          can recall beyond the word he was pronouncing when
          the selection disappeared will show the area of his
          attention.

          From the careful examination of these records Dr.
          Gray hopes to arrive at the causes of poor reading
          and to find remedies.

          Dr. E. M. Freeman of the faculty of the school of
          education is conducting a parallel investigation
          into the teaching of writing in the school.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MEDICAL INSPECTION

          _New York Globe_

          The medical inspection of the public school
          children is unsatisfactory, according to the
          local school board of District 29, Brooklyn. This
          district lies within Flushing avenue, Marcy avenue,
          Myrtle avenue, Tompkins avenue, Lexington avenue,
          Sumner avenue, Fulton street, Albany avenue,
          Eastern Parkway, Washington avenue, Fulton street,
          and Waverly avenue. The members of the board have
          been “keeping tabs” on the doctors sent to the
          schools by the Board of Health. They have found
          little uniformity in the work, some visits lasting
          only a few minutes, and others a whole afternoon,
          while anywhere from nine to thirty pupils have been
          examined.

          As a result of the investigation, the local board
          has submitted a report to the Board of Education
          suggesting that a more definite method of
          examination be required of the visiting physicians.
          The board states that it “found that there is no
          uniformity in their methods, except that they call
          daily at the schools assigned to them. The calls
          vary from five minutes to one and a half hours, and
          the number of children examined from one or two
          or none, to twenty or thirty per day. Some of the
          physicians visit the classrooms, and others see
          only the children who are reported by the teachers
          as needing attention.”

          This is the second criticism of the medical
          inspection received by the Board of Education this
          summer, the first coming from the Principals’
          Association of the City of New York, which
          forwarded resolutions to the effect “that the
          medical supervision of our schools is incomplete
          and generally unsatisfactory.”

          While there is no marked indication of such an
          outcome at the present time, it would not be at
          all surprising if an attempt were made by certain
          of the members of the Board of Education to induce
          the board to take steps to take over the control of
          the medical inspection by establishing a department
          of school hygiene. This has been advocated by City
          Superintendent Maxwell and by Dr. Luther H. Gulick,
          director of physical training. While not as yet
          approved by the Board of Education, the proposition
          is under consideration by the Charter Revision
          Commission.

          The recent criticisms of medical school inspection
          bear out those published by Dr. Maxwell in his
          latest annual report, in which he declared that
          “existing physical examinations made by the
          Department of Health are generally inadequate, and
          even when they are adequate are not followed by the
          desired results.” In support of this statement Dr.
          Maxwell quoted from principals’ reports to show
          that in only 248 schools--less than half the total
          number--were any examinations made for physical
          defects--as distinguished from examinations to
          detect contagious disease. In these 248 schools not
          more than one-third of the pupils were examined.
          It is only a few months since any examinations for
          physical defects were made outside of the boroughs
          of Manhattan and the Bronx, and then only because
          of the criticisms emanating from the New York
          committee of physical welfare of school children.

          *       *       *       *       *

          PUBLIC LIBRARY

          _Milwaukee Sentinel_

          “In the thirty-seven years’ history of the
          Milwaukee public library we have never been able
          to trace a single case of contagious disease to a
          library book that had been passed from a home in
          which the disease existed to one hitherto free.”

          This was the reply of J. V. Cargill, assistant
          librarian of the Milwaukee public library, to
          Dr. John Dill Robertson, health commissioner of
          Chicago, who has expressed the belief that library
          books are a medium for spreading such diseases
          as grippe, sore throat, measles, whooping cough,
          small pox, diphtheria, scarlet fever, tuberculosis
          and erysipelas. Dr. Robertson has sent a letter to
          Librarian Henry E. Legler of the Chicago public
          library asking co-operation in an effort to stamp
          out any danger of spreading diseases in this way.

          According to Mr. Cargill every possible effort is
          made by the Milwaukee library to prevent the spread
          of disease. In this the officials co-operate with
          the Milwaukee health department. Daily lists of
          the homes in which contagious disease is found
          are furnished to the library, and books that are
          returned from such homes are fumigated in a large
          vault at the main library. When a health inspector
          visits a home in which there is contagious disease,
          one of his first questions is whether or not there
          are library books. If such books are found the
          cards identifying them are removed by the inspector
          and mailed to the library, according to Mr.
          Cargill. When the patient recovers and the health
          department fumigates the house, the library books
          are also fumigated as an added precaution.

          The average book passing from home to home is never
          fumigated or otherwise disinfected, Mr. Cargill
          admitted, but he expressed doubt that any diseases
          were spread by such books.

          Among the ways in which Dr. Robertson of Chicago
          says disease may be spread are the following:
          Dampening the fingers to turn pages, placing books
          open side downward upon a bed, coughing or sneezing
          upon the pages or giving books to convalescent
          patients.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MUSEUM

          _New York Times_

          Rain gods, storm charms, rattles to make the
          thunder come, strange amulets which invite the
          lightning, more than five hundred devices in
          all which the Zuni Indians believe open up the
          sluice-ways of the skies, were unpacked early
          yesterday morning at the American Museum of Natural
          History.

          They had just come from New Mexico, where they had
          been collected for the museum by Dr. A. L. Kroeber
          of the University of California, who at great
          trouble and expense had induced the bad weather
          gods to come east. About the time the lid came off
          the first packing case the wind carried sheets of
          water against the attic where the collection is now
          on view and the tempest howled and shrieked until
          the little rain gods themselves shook under the
          hurly burly out-of-doors. The water god, Long Horn,
          rolled over to where the flower god was lying, and
          shook himself for very joy, for he felt that the
          man tribe of this great city would certainly be
          very thankful for all the downpour.

          It is so dry in the venerable town of the cliff
          dwellers, Zuni, that most of the time the streets
          are filled with dust, and top stories of the old
          cliff dwellings powder up and blow away in all
          directions. The Indians have lived there for 365
          years without being in any way affected by the
          manners and customs of the white men, according to
          Dr. Kroeber, who has just come from a residence of
          several months among them. Even though the United
          States Government has made a big reservoir and dug
          irrigation ditches for the Zunis, they still keep
          up their primitive worship, which revolves around
          the prayer, “Gods, give us rain.” As the tribe
          lives almost entirely upon the maize it raises, the
          ceremonies of rain-making bear an important part
          in its life. Most of the conversation of the Zunis
          consists of “Do you think there will be a shower?”
          and “Neighbor, how is your corn growing?”

          In many centuries there has been built up a ritual
          for the worship of the sky gods which is very
          intricate and mysterious and includes many secret
          observances. The study which Professor Kroeber has
          made is a very important one, for he will be able
          to describe observances about which little has been
          known. Many of the sacred symbols in his possession
          were acquired after much trouble and not a little
          risk, for the Zunis have an unwritten law that no
          white man is to have any of the objects used in
          their ceremonies, and that any one parting with
          them is entitled to have his throat cut.

          The rain gods are dressed in fantastic garb, and
          the clash of their primitive hues can be heard
          at a great distance. One of the symbols of the
          lightning is a blue pantagraphlike arrangement of
          lattice work which suddenly opens out to represent
          the quick discharge of the bolts of the gods. There
          are charms made like the forked flashes placed
          over the doors to invite the showers. In the great
          dances the participants wear wooden headgear carved
          to represent cloud forms and the moon and stars.
          Every creature which loves the wet is worked into
          the symbolism of Zuni worship. There are tadpoles,
          frogs, turtles, ducks, and geese, all of which are
          represented by the masks worn when the invocations
          to the gods of the rain are given.

          There are rattles made of shells, which, attached
          to the knees, make a prodigious noise. Peculiar
          spindle-like devices attached to long thongs may
          be swung about the head until they give a sound
          which to the Zuni imagination suggests the roll of
          thunder. One of the most valuable articles of the
          new collection is a bowl, probably of the period
          before Columbus came to this continent, which
          is notched all around with a step-like device,
          typifying the clouds and adorned with raised
          figures of fish and polliwogs and ducks. It is
          filled with water when the rain dances are given,
          and a mass of suds is made in it by adding soap
          weed. The priest stirs up the mixture with his
          hands, and the lather brimming over the sides of
          the bowl gives the effect of fleecy clouds.

          The collection, which is one of the most important
          ever brought out of the Southwest, is to be
          arranged by Dr. Kroeber, who has obtained a leave
          of absence from the University of California for
          that purpose. He was kept in the Museum all day by
          the snow, sleet, and rain.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENTS

          _Boston Transcript_

          Traffic conditions are regarded as so dangerous
          at the corner of Tremont and School streets, on
          account of the laying of the high-pressure pipes,
          that the mayor has ordered the contractor to work
          night and day, with forces as large as practicable,
          until the work is finished.

          The mayor was informed of the situation when he
          arrived at City Hall this morning and immediately
          made a personal inspection. He found large piles
          of dirt at each corner of School street and wagons
          used by the contractor so placed in receiving their
          loads that at times it was practically impossible
          for vehicular traffic to move at all. School street
          is one of the one-way thoroughfares and the volume
          of traffic that moves into it at the corner of
          Tremont, from both Tremont and Beacon streets,
          is very large at certain times of the day. Under
          the best conditions dangers are daily presented
          with swiftly moving automobiles coming down Beacon
          Hill, either to make the turn or to move straight
          ahead. It will probably be necessary to close
          School street some time this week, and, in fact,
          many persons declared today that such an order
          might prevent a serious accident, with conditions
          continuing as they are at present.

          The laying of the high-pressure pipes along Tremont
          street has been anything but agreeable to the
          contractor. The various underground wires and
          conduits of the public service corporations are
          ordinarily well placed in the files, but the ground
          beneath the asphalt of this thoroughfare contained
          numerous obstacles which were not anticipated by
          the city engineers who planned for the new system.

          At the corner of Tremont and Boylston streets the
          contractor found that, in order to carry the pipes
          in accordance with the blue prints, a huge two-foot
          main conduit of the gas company would have to be
          shifted. This caused much delay and it will be
          weeks before the changes will be made to satisfy
          the city authorities. Today a large space on the
          surface was boarded. Then followed the every-day
          difficulties encountered by the laborers in digging
          up the ties of the old street railway, which were
          not removed when the line was banished from the
          street.

          Today the laborers met with a still greater
          surprise when they encountered solid rock, brick
          and concrete obstructions far beneath the surface,
          and also deeply imbedded piles which had remained
          in the earth for scores of years and which do not
          appear on any blue print of the street that the
          City Hall records contain. It was learned, however,
          that the tunnels of brick and concrete were parts
          of an old steam-heating system installed many years
          ago by a company that planned to heat buildings at
          much less cost to the occupants than could possibly
          be done by individual plants. These operations were
          of short duration, and when they were given up,
          the city authorities failed to oblige the removal
          of the tunnels, which are eight feet beneath
          the surface and of no hindrance to the other
          underground works.

          The laborers are also digging up today the remnants
          of the physical property of the old Massachusetts
          Telephone Company, which existed nearly twenty
          years ago.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MUNICIPAL WORK

          _Springfield Republican_

          Co-operation between the city and the public
          service corporations to a greater extent than
          before in order to prevent the tearing up of newly
          laid pavement is expected to result from the
          Dickinson-street case, in which a pavement that
          has been down only two years is being broken open
          so that the United electric light company can put
          in its conduits. Samuel L. Wheeler, inspector of
          underground wires and conduits, who prescribes what
          wires shall be put underground each year, will try
          to place before the public service associates the
          plans for his work a year or more in advance. Thus
          the companies will have a chance to get their wires
          underground before the streets are paved.

          Mr Wheeler is obliged by law to order a mile of
          wire put underground each year in order that
          eventually all wires within a two-mile radius of
          the City hall shall be underground. In his 15
          years of work this is the first time that such a
          situation as that on Dickinson street has arisen.
          Superintendent Fred H. Clark of the department of
          streets and engineering said yesterday that no one
          is really to blame, since the street had to be
          paved when it was, and it was impossible at the
          time to order the wires underground before the
          paving was put down. The electric light company has
          expressed its willingness to co-operate in every
          way that it can. The supervisors have ordered the
          paving of Pine street and between Cedar and Walnut
          streets the company’s wires are still above ground.
          Although Mr Wheeler has not ordered these wires to
          be put underground, the company has said it will
          try to get them under even though its appropriation
          for this work has been made for the year.

          The supervisors and the street railway officials
          will confer this afternoon to plan for the relaying
          of tracks so that the work will precede street
          paving. The company intends to relay its tracks on
          Main street between the arch and the car barns and
          on Chestnut street between Allendale street and
          Jefferson avenue. Paving is to be done on these
          streets but it will follow the track work. The
          company does not want to relay its tracks on State
          street near the New England railroad, however,
          although the city wants to pave there, and a
          similar situation may arise on other streets where
          the company thinks its tracks good for a year or
          two longer. It is to consider these situations that
          the conference will be held.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NEW MUNICIPAL EQUIPMENT

          _Boston Transcript_

          Bursting water mains are not so great a menace in
          Boston since the water department installed a motor
          truck with a power appliance for quickly closing
          the heavy gates. Work which formerly required
          four men, laboring continuously for forty-five
          minutes, can be done in ten minutes by using the
          power of the truck. This mechanical device, an
          invention of George H. Finneran, superintendent of
          the distribution branch of the water department,
          not only conserves the water supply and reduces
          the damage due to breaks, but permits of rapid
          regulation of water volume at fires, facilitates
          the testing of gates and relieves the anxiety
          always attending derangement or damage to the water
          system.

          In one of Boston’s most important thoroughfares,
          lined with costly buildings, there is a water main
          which, if completely broken apart, would allow the
          escape of 50,000 gallons of water each minute.
          Controlling this line are gate valves thirty-six
          inches in diameter which, in closing, require 307
          turns of a gate wrench and, formerly, the services
          of four men for about forty-five minutes. A few
          minutes’ delay sometimes meant the loss of life and
          thousands of dollars. These gates, the largest in
          the city, can now be closed in ten minutes by one
          man and the motor truck, which was built for the
          purpose by the White Company of Cleveland.

          The truck is required to respond to fire alarms and
          other emergencies where water must be controlled to
          prevent loss or damage. The calls are frequently
          overlapping, and crews are on duty day and night.
          The runs vary from one block to the farthest
          end of the water system. Under the old scheme,
          when several gates had to be closed, the few men
          available at night were almost exhausted before
          shutting the last gate. By its ability to work
          continuously the truck has relieved the fear of
          being unable to cope with any emergency.

          The gate-closing device consists of a universal
          wrench socket with a worm gear, enclosed in an
          aluminum housing and mounted on the running board
          of the truck, so that it can be easily brought into
          position immediately over a water-gate manhole.
          When the truck is in position a wrench is slipped
          through the socket. This wrench fits the nut on
          the gate-gear below. The universal wrench socket,
          together with a universal joint on the end of the
          wrench, affords sufficient flexibility in case the
          truck is not on level ground, or in case the wrench
          socket is not directly over the gate nut. It is an
          easy matter, however, for the driver to bring his
          truck into the exact position.

          The worm gear is driven off the regular
          transmission of the truck. The device is operated
          by a lever placed upon the side of the truck and
          easily accessible to the driver. In closing gates
          the forward speeds of the transmission are used.
          In opening the reverse is used. All gears are made
          of chrome or nickel steel. All bearings are ball
          bearings. The aluminum housing is firmly bolted to
          the frame of the chassis and well braced to resist
          torque. The wrench is a hollow square steel tube
          terminating in a specially hardened steel socket
          with universal joint between socket and tube.

          The gates are equipped with indicators showing the
          position of the valve and informing the operator
          when the valve is seated or entirely opened. Where
          indicators have not been attached to the gates a
          counter is used. This counter is placed on the
          end of the wrench recording the number of its
          revolutions. This helps the operator to determine
          when the valve is entirely up or down. As a means
          of safety in the event of the valve seating with
          force or before the operator expected, a pin of
          known strength, placed in the universal joint of
          the wrench, breaks off and breaks the line of force
          between the engine and the gate, thus preventing
          damage to either the gate or the gate-operating
          device.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SAFETY CAMPAIGN

          _New York Herald_

          With the belief that Long Island will be the
          touring ground for more motor cars this summer than
          ever before, largely on account of the European
          war, James A. McCrea, general manager of the Long
          Island Railroad, has announced the beginning of
          a campaign of sign display asking the public to
          co-operate with the railroad in saving human life.

          Enormous signs, 2½×10 feet, electrically
          illuminated at night, will be stretched across the
          highways, in many cases attached to the structure
          of the modern overhead crossings, making a plea
          to the motorists as they speed under them to be
          careful in approaching and passing over the grade
          crossings that still remain on the main highways of
          the island. The railroad has eliminated more than
          three hundred grade crossings at an expense of 15
          million dollars, and yet fatal accidents occur in
          some places where there is a wide open view of the
          railroad in both directions. There are still 631
          grade crossings between New York City and Montauk
          Point. Of these more than three hundred are guarded
          by gate-men, two at some points, at a cost to the
          railroad of $25,000 a month.

          Careful motorists do not combat in the least
          the statement, frequently made by the railroad
          officers, that many of the fatal grade crossing
          accidents on Long Island were the result, pure and
          simple, of the motorists’ recklessness. Many of
          them drive too carelessly over the crossings, the
          officers maintain, assuming all the time that the
          locomotive driver is looking out for them. Mutual
          watchfulness is observed in the city, and it is
          contended that the same should be true in the
          country.

          Ten great signs already have been erected at
          prominent points, where they cannot fail to
          attract the attention of motorists. They are in
          black and white letters that may be read several
          blocks away. They caution:

            ........................................
            . THIS SIGN MAY SAVE YOUR LIFE TODAY.  .
            .                                      .
            . All the precautions in the world     .
            . will not save the lives of those who .
            . drive automobiles recklessly over    .
            . railroad crossings.                  .
            .                                      .
            . When approaching a crossing please   .
            . stop, look and listen.               .
            .                                      .
            . We are doing our part. Won’t you     .
            . do yours?                            .
            .                                      .
            . LONG ISLAND RAILROAD.                .
            ........................................

          Mr. McCrea says the grade crossing problem has
          been a stupendous one, particularly since the
          advent of the motor car. He is open to suggestions
          that will eliminate the danger at any point and
          immediately accepted two that were made to him by
          persons interested only in the safety of the public
          in general. One was in reference to a dangerous
          crossing, now guarded by men and lights, but where
          the conformation of the ground so places the lights
          that they are practically valueless as a warning.
          The other was in reference to the color of the
          gates used by the Long Island Railroad and all
          others in this country. The universal custom in
          this country is to paint the gates white.

          In Europe, particularly in Germany and Austria, all
          the railroad gates, toll gates and custom house
          gates are painted black and white. They can be
          seen for long distances and are almost as easily
          observed in the night as in the day.

          Not only is the railroad putting up signs calling
          the attention of motorists to the danger of driving
          recklessly over grade crossings; it will conduct an
          advertising campaign with a series of “life saving
          bulletins.” These will appear regularly and will
          plead for greater care on the part of motorists.
          One of its “life saving bulletins” will read in
          part:

            Watch for the flagman’s lantern.
            Listen for the warning bell.
            Slow down.
            Look up and down the rails.

          We are doing all that time and money permits in
          abolishing grade crossings. Will you help us end
          accidents by doing your share?

          *       *       *       *       *

          BUSINESS MERGER

          _Milwaukee Sentinel_

          Through a deal involving about $400,000, the
          Milwaukee-Western Fuel company has bought out
          entirely the docks, property and business of the
          Northwestern Fuel company’s Milwaukee branch.

          The big merger has been pending for a year.
          Agreement was finally reached on Wednesday,
          although details were not arranged until Saturday.
          The Milwaukee-Western will take full possession on
          Monday.

          It is in no sense a consolidation. As far as
          Milwaukee business is concerned the Northwestern
          Fuel company has ceased to exist. As one of its
          Milwaukee officials remarked after the deal was
          closed, “They have swallowed us whole, head and
          tail.”

          The Northwestern company was one of the oldest coal
          firms in Milwaukee, having had offices here for
          thirty-two years. In sales it did a yearly business
          in the city of about $2,000,000.

          The deal brings a great amount of valuable property
          into the hands of the Milwaukee-Western Fuel
          company. Its bought out rival had on hand about
          75,000 tons of coal. It possessed two large coal
          docks. One, at the foot of Washington street, with
          two slips on the Kinnickinnic river, is 1,000x500
          feet in size. This dock is on the Chicago and
          North-Western road. The other is at the foot of
          Seventeenth street and has 1,000 feet frontage
          on the Menomonee river. It is on the Chicago,
          Milwaukee and St. Paul road.

          The capacity of the two docks combined is estimated
          at 150,000 tons of anthracite and 200,000 tons of
          bituminous coal. Their loading capacity aggregates
          150 cars a day.

          The Milwaukee offices of the Northwestern Fuel
          company were at 152 Second street. For a time they
          will be used by the Milwaukee-Western company
          as a branch office. The Northwestern will also
          use them until its affairs are settled. Whether
          the offices will be continued as a branch of the
          Milwaukee-Western Fuel company’s big offices at 14
          Wisconsin street has not yet been determined.

          Under the terms of the deal the purchaser will
          assume responsibility for all unfilled contracts
          of the Northwestern company. The Milwaukee-Western
          expects to be able to give positions to nearly all
          the Milwaukee employes of the Northwestern.

          The deal makes the Milwaukee-Western Fuel company
          sole agents in this city for the Delaware,
          Lackawanna and Western road’s Scranton anthracite
          and standard hard coal, for which the Northwestern
          Fuel company was also agent.

          Officers of the Milwaukee-Western say that the
          change will increase their company’s business by
          from 300,000 to 400,000 tons yearly.

          The headquarters of the Northwestern Fuel company
          are in St. Paul, and it has big docks in Duluth and
          Superior. Its chief business lies in that section
          of the country. This will remain unimpaired, for
          the present deal affects only the Milwaukee branch.

          The officers of the Milwaukee-Western Fuel company
          are: President, Edward A. Uhrig; vice president,
          Alexander Uhrig; secretary and treasurer, Charles
          W. Moody.

          *       *       *       *       *

          NEW FEATURE IN MANUFACTURING

          _Chicago Tribune_

          This is the story of a world war, a despairing
          manufacturer, and a cow’s ear.

          The despairing manufacturer shall be nameless here.
          In Chicago and all over the country his name is
          well known as one of the greatest makers of water
          color paint in America.

          The part taken by the world war is told in the
          trade columns, where its effects on industry in the
          United States have been vividly shown. The cow’s
          ear belonged to a cow that may have been called
          “Boss” or “Bess,” but that isn’t so important.

          The agency that overcame the world war, that
          soothed the manufacturer, that found the cow’s ear
          and introduced the two shall receive its deserved
          mention--it was the Chicago Association of Commerce.

          It was more than a month ago that the water color
          paint manufacturer came to the civic industrial
          division of the Commerce association and told of
          his business woes.

          “We are about to shut down on account of the war,”
          he said. “We can send out no more paint to our
          trade. For years we have supplied them with an
          imported water color paint brush with each box.

          “The brushes are made in Germany. It is a secret
          process. They use either camel’s hair or rabbit’s
          hair of a fine quality. They are excellent brushes.
          Our trade is demanding them. We have none left. We
          can get no more on account of the war. We shall
          have to close down.”

          Anderson Pace, industrial commissioner for the
          association, told the manufacturer to hold on a
          little longer. He started inquiries in all lines
          known to the association. The country was ransacked
          for imported water color brushes, and all to no
          avail.

          Then the investigators, right here in Chicago,
          and without wasting a postage stamp, got in
          communication with a stockyards savant who was
          the originator of the boast that “none of the pig
          escaped but the squeal.”

          “The most tender, delicate, yet strong and soft
          hair in the world is to be found only in a cow’s
          ear,” said the stockyards genius. “Camel’s hair and
          imported rabbit’s hair can’t touch it for quality.
          It makes the best water color brushes that can be
          made.”

          At the stockyards today men with shears are
          snipping the tender hairs from Bossy’s ears as
          the bodies of the slain animals are conveyed from
          the killing pens. In New York a broker has made
          arrangements with a brush manufacturer, who is
          putting out an article that artists say fits itself
          much more readily to the application of water color
          than the old brushes imported from Germany.

          In Chicago the nameless great manufacturer of water
          color paint despairs no more. His plant is running,
          his force is busy, his employés are happy, and the
          orders are coming just the same as before the war.

          *       *       *       *       *

          REAL ESTATE

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Another of the old exclusive homes in the one
          time fashionable block on Prairie avenue between
          Eighteenth and Nineteenth streets, is to be given
          over to business uses, the Arthur Meeker residence
          at 1815, which has been purchased by D. C. Heath
          & Co., school book publishers. The conveyance was
          made by Mrs. Grace M. Meeker, and a consideration
          of $35,000 is named in the deed, which was filed
          for record yesterday.

          The house, which is a large, attractive three story
          stone structure, was erected by Joseph Sears about
          thirty years ago, and about ten years ago was
          purchased by Mr. Meeker and extensively remodeled
          by him. It contains twenty-one rooms. It occupies
          a lot 75x140 feet extending back to a twenty foot
          alley, and there is a large garage in the rear.

          The Heath company, which is the third largest
          school book publishing house in the country, and
          is now located in the Studebaker building on South
          Wabash avenue, will locate their business at their
          Prairie avenue purchase about March 1, using the
          house for their general offices, and the garage,
          which will be enlarged, for their stock room. The
          sale was negotiated by Eugene A. Bournique & Co.

          *       *       *       *       *

          REAL ESTATE

          _Philadelphia Ledger_

          The six and a half acre plot of ground at 5th and
          Cayuga streets, which has been used as a picnic
          park for a number of years, under the name of
          Central Park, has been sold by S. C. Abernethy for
          Joseph S. Slomkowski to a builder, who will begin
          the work of developing the ground in the spring
          by the erection of about 30 houses on the 5th
          street front and 65 houses on Reese street. The
          price paid for the ground was close to $60,000.
          Practically all of the tract has been sold with
          the exception of a small section south of Cayuga
          street. The seller reserves for his own use a plot
          of ground 120 feet by 130 feet at the corner of 5th
          and Cayuga streets, on which he will build a new
          hotel. The ground sold has a frontage of more than
          700 feet on the west side of 5th street to Annsbury
          street, with a frontage of 307 feet on Cayuga
          street to the North Penn Railroad, and a frontage
          of 400 feet on the north boundary. The sale is the
          largest transaction in ground made in this section
          of the city for several years. Central Park has
          for years been a favorite picnic ground during the
          summer, particularly with labor organizations.

          *       *       *       *       *

          PROPOSED NEW HOTEL

          _Boston Transcript_

          Another large hotel, to cost about $1,250,000, is
          to be erected in the retail section of the city,
          at the corner of Washington and Avery streets. The
          Commonwealth Associates, Inc., who acquired title
          to the land last month, have let the contract for
          the construction of an eleven-story building to the
          Haynes Construction Company. Clarence H. Blackall
          is the architect and Hurd & Gore are the consulting
          architects. Morse Brothers have taken a lease of
          the hotel for a period of twenty years.

          With the exception of the Washington street
          frontage and about 100 feet fronting on Avery
          street, which will be used for stores, the entire
          building will be devoted to the purposes of a
          first-class commercial hotel. On the first floor
          will be the office, reading-room, large public
          dining-room and buffet. In the basement, under
          the corner of Haymarket place and Avery street,
          there will be a rathskeller, entered both from
          the hotel and from the street, with the kitchens,
          serving-rooms, etc., in the rear, under the hotel
          lobby. A sub-basement will contain storerooms,
          machinery, heating plant, etc.

          The second floor will be largely taken up by
          another public dining-room, banquet-room, etc., the
          remainder of the building being given over to guest
          rooms, with the exception of the eleventh story,
          which will contain specially fitted sample-rooms
          for commercial travellers. The rooms will be
          unusually spacious, with convenient alcoves for
          beds. Large windows will light the room proper
          and the alcove. The finish will be of carefully
          selected Missouri red gum, stained a rich mahogany.

          The building will be fireproof in every particular,
          and will be constructed in accordance with the
          most approved methods, practically no wood being
          used except for the doors and windows. All floors
          will be of concrete, with tile and marble-finished
          flooring in the public rooms and corridors, tiling
          in all the bathrooms and carpets elsewhere.
          The building will be heated and ventilated in
          an approved manner and furnished with all the
          electrical appliances. The elevators and stairs
          will be centrally located, so as to give immediate
          access to all parts of the house.

          The exterior will be of limestone and brick in the
          style of the French Renaissance, which effect will
          be carried through the decorations and finish of
          the principal rooms. A broad marquise finished in
          bronze will mark the entrance of the hotel proper
          and extend along the whole frontage. A service
          entrance will be at the rear on Haymarket place.

          Leases for the stores have already been arranged on
          long terms with David H. Posner and Coes & Young,
          both of whom have stores in other parts of the
          city. The Commonwealth Associates, Inc., owners of
          the property, were organized through the office of
          Codman & Street, Easton Building, with George U.
          Crocker, president; Max Shoolman, vice president,
          and Gerald G. E. Street, treasurer.

          *       *       *       *       *

          MUNICIPAL BOND SALE

          _Springfield Republican_

          City Treasurer E. T. Tifft yesterday surprised
          himself and financial experts as well by selling
          a bond issue of $1,000,000 at remarkably good
          terms, in spite of the tying up of money by war
          conditions. The issue was sold to N. W. Harris &
          Co of Boston, who will pay the city a premium of
          $5670, bringing the interest rate down to 4.30 per
          cent. This rate is less than one-half of 1 per cent
          higher than the rate for last year’s issue, and
          congratulations are coming to the city and to the
          city treasurer on this success from many financial
          men who have been looking with interest on this
          issue as the first test of the bond market since
          the war began.

          The bid of the winning company was 100.567, while
          the second bid was made by the Third national bank
          of this city offering 100.44. E. H. Rollins Sons,
          A. B. Leach & Co, Perry, Coffin & Burr, and Blake
          Bros & Co, all of Boston, made a joint bid for the
          issue which was third, the bid being 100.176. Of
          the $1,000,000 there was $200,000 on the municipal
          building loan paying 4 per cent, and the remaining
          $800,000 is in 4½ per cent bonds. The issue was
          made up of the following loans: Municipal building
          loan, 20 years, 4 per cent, $200,000; high school
          of commerce, 20 years, 4½ per cent, $150,000;
          Fulton-street loan, 20 years, 4½ per cent,
          $400,000; Myrtle-street school addition, 20 years,
          4½ per cent, $136,000; land for school, Franklin
          and Greenwood streets, 20 years, 4½ per cent,
          $64,000; Brightwood school addition, 20 years,
          4½ per cent, $25,000; Walnut-street engine house
          addition, 20 years, 4½ per cent, $25,000; total,
          $1,000,000.

          The rate at which these bonds were sold shows
          that the state of the money market is not as far
          from normal as was feared by many people, and at
          the same time an opportunity is given to local
          people to invest in the city bonds at a price
          which will bring them a better return than can be
          obtained on the issues in usual times. These bonds
          are tax exempt, the exemption extending to the
          federal income tax. Interest on municipal bonds is
          collectible without certificates of ownership and
          individuals are not required to report the income
          to the federal government. The successful bidders,
          N. W. Harris & Co, are represented in this city by
          Percy O. Dorr, who has offices in the Massachusetts
          Mutual building.

          The Boston News Bureau, commenting on the sale,
          says: “The sale of $1,000,000 bonds to N. W.
          Harris & Co by the city of Springfield to-day is
          striking evidence of a revival of confidence in
          the bond market. The bankers are offering the
          bonds on the following bases: For the 4½’s, 1915
          maturity, 4¼ per cent basis; 1916-1919, 4.20
          per cent basis; 1920-1934, 4.15 per cent basis.
          For the 4’s, 1915 maturity, 4¼ per cent basis;
          1916-1919, 4.20 per cent basis; 1920-1954, at
          99. To gain some idea of the attractive level
          at which these bonds are being sold, compared
          with prices for previous issues, it need only be
          remembered that in 1913 the city obtained a 3.88
          per cent basis for an issue of bonds, a 3.81 per
          cent basis in 1912 and a 3.51 per cent basis in
          1911. The current sale is the most important bit
          of public financing which has been accomplished in
          the local market since the war began. It is more
          than ordinarily significant that one of the biggest
          New England banking houses should take hold of this
          Springfield issue at a time when the bond market
          is suffering more or less from excessive timidity.
          It serves the double purpose of providing for the
          financial needs of one of New England’s largest
          cities and of creating a little interest in the
          bond market on a basis which is fair both to the
          city and to the investor. There is evidence of
          returning courage and confidence.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          RAILROAD DIVIDEND

          _Chicago Tribune_

          Directors of the Pennsylvania company declared
          yesterday a semi-annual dividend of 1 per cent as
          against the usual dividend of 4 per cent at this
          time of the year. Since 1910 the Pennsylvania
          company has paid 7 per cent yearly, divided into
          two semi-annual installments of 3 per cent in the
          first half and 4 per cent in the second half of the
          year.

          The issued capital of the Pennsylvania company
          is $80,000,000. The annual disbursement has
          been, since 1910, $5,600,000 annually. This year,
          however, the company has declared only 4 per cent,
          or $3,200,000, so that the reduced amount of
          dividends is $2,400,000.

          The Pennsylvania company operates all the lines of
          the Pennsylvania system west of Pittsburgh. All the
          stock of the Pennsylvania company is owned by the
          Pennsylvania Railroad company, and to the latter
          corporation all the dividends have been paid.

          The outstanding capital stock of the Pennsylvania
          Railroad company is $499,265,700. The annual
          dividends from the Pennsylvania company have been
          equal to something over 1 per cent on the capital
          stock of the Pennsylvania Railroad company, and the
          cut made yesterday in dividends is equal to about
          ½ per cent on the railroad company’s stock. The
          railroad company pays its shareholders 6 per cent
          per annum, this rate having obtained since 1908.
          The railroad company’s earnings last year, that is,
          1913, were 8.02 per cent on the share capital.

          The 5 per cent raise in freight rates granted by
          the interstate commerce commission was denied to
          coal, coke and iron ore. The coal and coke business
          of the Pennsylvania system amounts to about
          one-third of the company’s gross business and on
          that no advance will be received.

          In connection with the reduction of the
          Pennsylvania company’s dividend, the directors
          issued a statement saying that the cut was due
          “chiefly to a large decrease in traffic and a
          material reduction in the revenues of the lines
          west of Pittsburgh.”

          Meanwhile the directors of the Pittsburgh,
          Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis, one of the
          controlled lines of the Pennsylvania company,
          met and decided not to consider the semi-annual
          dividend distribution until the next meeting of the
          board, on Dec. 30.

          *       *       *       *       *

          RETAIL PRICE OF BEEF

          _Boston Herald_

          That there is no truth in the report emanating from
          Chicago to the effect that the record-breaking
          drought in Kansas will cause the retail prices of
          beef to go to unheard of prices in the winter, is
          the declaration of local provision dealers. It
          is their opinion that, as the dry spell is only
          in certain sections of Kansas, it cannot affect
          materially the prices in the East.

          There has been no increase in prices lately, they
          further declare, and certain choice cuts are, in
          fact, a great deal lower than at this time last
          year. The choicest cuts in sirloin steak are more
          than 10 cents lower than they were in 1912 and
          other cuts are in the same proportion.

          “There is no danger of the prices of beef being
          raised in the winter in the East,” declared a local
          representative of a large packing house. “There
          need be no fear that the steady rush of cattle
          to the big live stock markets of the middle West
          will materially raise the prices here. In fact,
          the prices are lower on some cuts than last year
          and I see no reason why they should not continue
          to stand at the same price. One must remember that
          the drought is confined only to certain sections of
          the state of Kansas and that other sections of the
          country are not affected. If there is a raise in
          prices it will be confined only to those immediate
          regions where the drought is.”

          That the packers are making fortunes during the dry
          spell is also denied by the local dealers. While
          live stock prices are to a certain extent lower
          now, the wholesale prices on the average have also
          decreased and the housewife is getting the benefit
          of it, is their assertion. They further declare
          that the packers make a small profit at best and
          also that the retailers’ profit is not great, as
          they have unusually heavy expenses.

          *       *       *       *       *

          LOCAL MARKET PRICES

          _Boston Transcript_

          Peaches, peaches, and then more peaches, meet
          the eye of the visitor to the market section in
          these closing days of summer. Little baskets, big
          baskets, crates and carriers full of the luscious
          fruit are displayed everywhere. Wholesale prices
          are reasonable, as usual when the crop is large,
          but prices at retail rarely fall below a certain
          level. This is one of the hard things for the
          layman to understand, why a big crop does not bring
          low prices. Wholesalers say that the retailers
          are to blame, and the latter say that they cannot
          afford to handle the fruit except with a generous
          margin of profit. The consumer thinks that the
          retailer ought to be content with something less
          than 100 per cent profit.

          Current supplies of peaches are coming from widely
          separated points. Few California peaches are now
          offered, and most of the Georgia crop has also been
          marketed, but West Virginia, Maryland, New Jersey
          and Connecticut are shipping freely to this market.
          In late years much of the New Jersey crop has been
          shipped into the convenient markets of New York and
          Philadelphia. In this market New Jersey peaches
          have to compete sharply with Connecticut grown
          fruit, and, as freights from Connecticut are less
          than from New Jersey, the former have a manifest
          advantage. Freights and packing cost the New Jersey
          farmer about 50 cents for an ordinary peach basket,
          and more for a six basket carrier, which is now
          the favorite way of shipping fine table fruit. As
          a full basket of Connecticut peaches can be had at
          retail at 75 cents to $1, there is not much margin
          for the more distant shipper. New Jersey fruit
          does not stand up for shipping so well as other
          varieties.

          When one goes into the market for peaches, one
          finds a wide variety of qualities and packages.
          As a rule, early peaches are clingstones and late
          peaches are freestones. The latter have manifest
          advantages, but when they are desired care should
          be taken to see that the buyer gets what is wanted.
          One needs to remember that freestones from Georgia
          and the South may be selling side by side with
          clingstones from farther North. Sweetness and
          flavor should also be insisted upon, while it is
          always a mistake to buy half-rotten fruit because
          it is cheap. By the dozen, good peaches can be
          bought for 10 to 25 cents. The small baskets that
          come in the carriers bring 40 to 50 cents, while
          old-fashioned peach baskets sell at 75 cents to
          $1.25. West Virginia is shipping peaches in bushel
          baskets, a shape first made familiar by Michigan
          shippers. That state has not yet begun shipments,
          but they will come later. These large baskets cost
          $1.25 to $1.75 wholesale, and about $1.50 to $2.25
          at retail.

          While peaches have the right of way at this season,
          other fall fruits are being freely offered,
          especially crabapples and plums. “Crabs” were
          selling in North Market street Wednesday at 50
          cents a bushel, but housekeepers are paying at the
          rate of $1.60 a bushel by the peck. Another case of
          “quick sales and small profits”? Native preserving
          plums are selling at 25 to 40 cents a basket.
          Damsons and damson plums are in the market, and
          sell at 30 to 40 cents. This is a great year for
          New England apple and plum orchards, and, in fact,
          fruit of all kinds will be plentiful and cheap.
          Exports of apples from this country are likely to
          be materially lessened by the war, and the surplus
          fruit must be absorbed by home markets. Apple men
          are talking $1 a barrel as probably the wholesale
          price in this market later. Just now small lots of
          apples are selling at 40 to 50 cents a peck for
          cooking and 50 to 60 cents for table fruit.

          Blueberries from Nova Scotia and Prince Edward
          Island are still in the market and sell at 18 to
          20 cents, watermelons bring 50 to 60 cents each
          and cantaloupes 8 to 10 cents each. California
          plums sell at 40 to 60 cents a basket, Bartlett
          pears at 20 to 30 cents a dozen, California grapes
          at 40 to 50 cents a basket for Malagas and seedless
          and 50 to 60 cents for Tokays. Native grapes sell
          at 15 to 20 cents for Delawares and black varieties.

          Summer vegetables are in seasonable supply, and
          low prices are quoted for most varieties. Green
          corn is selling at 20 to 25 cents a dozen ears,
          early celery at 15 cents, green peas at 65 to 75
          cents a peck, string beans at 5 to 8 cents a quart,
          shell beans at 8 cents for Limas and horticultural,
          cauliflower at 10 to 20 cents each, cucumbers
          at 5 cents each, egg plant at 15 to 20 cents,
          tomatoes at 8 to 10 cents a pound, mushrooms at $1
          to $1.25 a pound, white potatoes at 25 to 30 cents
          a peck, sweet potatoes at 5 cents a pound, onions
          at 8 cents a quart for native, 8 cents a pound
          for Spanish and 18 cents a quart for small white
          pickling, squash at 4 cents a pound for marrow, 5
          cents each for summer and 20 to 25 cents each for
          vegetable marrow, cabbage at 8 to 15 cents each,
          beets at 8 cents a quart, carrots at 3 cents a
          pound, turnips at 5 cents and parsnips at 8 cents.
          Salad vegetables are unchanged, lettuce still
          selling at 5 cents and other vegetables at 5 to 8
          cents.

          Prices of lamb have declined, and a cash customer
          can now get a good hind leg or hind-quarter
          at 22 cents, though a charge customer who is
          particular about quality will have to pay 25 cents.
          Forequarters are selling at 14 cents, sides at 20
          to 21 cents, loins at 25 cents and chops at 38
          to 40 cents. Mutton is unchanged at 18 cents for
          loins, 11 to 12 cents for forequarters, 25 to 28
          cents for chops and 18 cents for “hung” legs. Veal
          cuts are selling at 40 cents for fillet, 45 cents
          for steak, 30 cents for chops and 22 cents for
          loins.

          Beef prices are easier at wholesale, but retail
          prices are still firmly held at 33 to 38 cents for
          sirloin steak, 40 to 50 cents for rump steak and 25
          to 35 cents for round steak. Roasting pieces sell
          at 35 cents for the back of the rump, 25 cents for
          the face, 25 to 30 cents for the first cut of the
          rib and 20 to 25 cents for the second cut. Corned
          pieces are selling at 25 cents for brisket, 18
          cents for rib, 18 cents for the sticking piece and
          10 cents for flank.

          Pork provisions are selling at 25 cents for pork
          loins, 22 to 25 cents for whole hams, 30 to 35
          cents for sliced ham, 25 cents for bacon, 17 cents
          for smoked, corned, pickled and fresh shoulders, 15
          cents for salt pork, 22 to 25 cents for sausages,
          16 cents for Frankfurters, 15 to 18 cents for lard,
          10 to 12 cents for pigs’ feet, 12 to 20 cents for
          tripe, 25 to 30 cents for tongue, 45 cents for
          dried beef, 15 to 16 cents for beef liver, 30 cents
          to $1 each for sweetbreads, and 50 to 90 cents each
          for calves’ liver.

          At the poultry stalls trade is quiet, as usual
          at this season. Fall trade has not yet begun in
          earnest. Native roasting chickens are selling at 35
          cents, Western chickens at 28 cents, Philadelphia
          capons at 38 cents, Western capons at 30 to 32
          cents, native broilers at 30 cents, Western
          broilers at 28 cents, hothouse broilers at $1.25 a
          pair, frozen turkeys at 30 to 32 cents, native fowl
          at 25 cents, Western fowl at 23 to 25 cents, spring
          ducklings at 25 cents, spring geese at 28 cents,
          broiler turkeys at $3 to $3.50 a pair, squab at 35
          to 50 cents each, and pigeons at $3 a dozen.

          Butter and eggs have not been advanced further, but
          prices are very firm. Northern creamery butter in
          tubs sells at 38 cents, and in boxes at 40 cents,
          with individual prints at 40 cents, unsalted prints
          at 50 cents, Western creamery in tubs at 35 cents
          and Vermont dairy at 33 cents in tubs and 33 to
          35 cents in boxes. High prices have promoted the
          use of both butter and eggs from cold storage.
          Total stocks in local cold storage warehouses at
          last report were 300,191 packages, against 299,020
          packages a week ago and 321,303 packages a year ago.

          Eggs are firm and unchanged, best hennery stock
          being quoted at 45 cents, Eastern at 40 cents,
          Western at 33 cents and storage at 32 cents. Total
          stocks of eggs in local cold storage warehouses at
          last report were 399,589 cases, against 402,004
          cases a week ago and 490,945 cases at the same time
          last year.

          Large mackerel are scarce and high, but medium
          mackerel are to be had at 25 cents each and small
          mackerel at 18 cents. Spanish mackerel sell at 25
          cents, Eastern salmon at 30 to 35 cents, Western
          salmon at 20 to 25 cents, smelts at 30 to 35
          cents, bluefish at 15 cents, weakfish at 15 cents,
          striped bass at 35 cents, black bass at 18 cents,
          butterfish at 12½ cents, scup at 15 cents, tautog
          at 12 cents, swordfish at 25 cents, halibut at 25
          to 30 cents, cod and haddock at 8 cents, brook
          trout at 75 cents, flounders at 10 to 12 cents,
          eels at 18 cents, sea perch at 20 cents a dozen.

          Oysters are in season again, but it needs cool
          weather as well as an “r” in the month to bring
          about a demand. Providence River sell at 45 cents
          and Cotuits at 75 cents. New York scallops are
          in the market and sell at $1 a quart, though the
          close time is not yet off in this State. Lobsters
          are selling at 33 cents for live chicken, 35 cents
          for large live and 40 cents for large boiled,
          soft-shell crabs at $1 a dozen, little necks at 30
          cents a dozen or $1.75 a peck, clams at 30 cents a
          quart shucked or 50 cents in the shell by the peck,
          and quahogs at 60 cents a quart shucked. Finnan
          haddie sells at 12 cents.

          *       *       *       *       *

          HOTEL STORY

          _New York Herald_

          When a clerk at the desk of Bretton Hall picked up
          the desk telephone in response to a ring about nine
          o’clock last Friday evening he caught the words of
          the operator to a man in one of the rooms.

          “Indeed, I don’t know what you want, sir,” she was
          saying; “but here’s the clerk. You can explain to
          him.”

          “If they’s such a thing as a bootjack in this
          metropolitan hostlery,” a co’n and cotton voice
          enunciated in exasperated accents, “I wish yo’ all
          would send it up to mah room fo’ about two minutes.”

          “Certainly, sir,” said the clerk. “Front! Send the
          bootblack up to 846.”

          The bootblack came down on a run, talking Greek to
          himself. The desk telephone rang again before the
          clerk could ask questions.

          “I don’t want any bootblack. I don’t want ’em
          painted. I want to pull ’em off. Send me a jack.
          Don’t yo’ all understand English?”

          “Tell the engineer to rush a man with a kit of
          tools up to that room,” the clerk hurriedly
          ordered. “Right away, sir,” he spoke into the
          telephone.

          “If it wasn’t for losin’ me job, I’d a kilt that
          felly,” the engine room assistant reported when he
          quickly returned from the eighth floor. “Th’ way he
          talked I’d not stand”--

          The elevator door flew open with a crash and a
          tall, elderly man with light hair worn long strode
          to the desk, his jaws set, but his lips twitching
          with each step.

          “By gad, suh!” he shouted, pounding the desk and
          leaning across it to glare at the astonished clerk.
          “I ain’t goin’ to allow no paper collared, Yankee
          clerk to make spo’t of me. If I wa’n’t absolutely
          certain that yo’ are jes’ one provincial New Yo’ker
          of the ignoramus variety I would give yo’ all the
          canin’ of you’ mis’able life, old as I am.

          “Neveh mind explanations. Yo’ jes’ send that long,
          lanky No’th Ca’lina lookin’ boy yondeh up to mah
          room with me and we’ll see if I got to go to bed
          with mah boots on or go back to Geo’ga to get ’em
          off.”

          The lanky boy reported that the boots were “sure
          some tight,” but his co-operation in their removal
          had netted him “fo’ bits.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          SUBWAY STORY

          _New York Times_

          “Wake up! Your station next,” shouted the Subway
          guard, as he shook a sleeping passenger. The
          passenger managed to let a “thank you” escape him,
          and propped his eyes open until the train came to a
          stop at the station.

          “How did you know he got off at that station?” the
          guard was asked as the train moved on.

          “How did I know? Why, he is on here every night,
          and he goes to sleep as soon as he gets on the
          train. I have awakened him so regularly that he
          thinks now it is one of my duties. He would never
          forgive me if I overlooked him.

          “See that man sleeping over there in that middle
          seat, and that one over yonder near the other door?
          They work downtown somewhere and come up every
          night on this train. I always have to wake them up.
          The first man there gets off at 145th Street and
          the one by the door at 168th. We know practically
          all the regular passengers on the late night
          trains. Some work, while others are just rounders
          who are out every night, returning always on the
          same train with as much regularity as those who
          work.

          “I have never missed but one, and he seemed
          terribly cut up about it. He talked like I was paid
          to ‘mind’ him. I look out for him now. I have
          scraped up a good many acquaintances in this way.
          Sometimes the sleepers are newspaper chaps, and
          they give us an early morning paper; others give us
          a smile and say ‘howdy?’ when we meet.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          A MIRAGE

          _New York Sun_

          Cap’n Duke, who hangs about the beach at Far
          Rockaway and tells stories of the sea to little
          children, saw a mirage yesterday afternoon just
          as the sun was setting. He was talking to a group
          of little ones at the time and he called their
          attention to it.

          “See that four funnelled steamship hanging up there
          in the sky upside down?” he said. “And then off
          there on the starboard bow of the steamer don’t you
          see a five masted schooner with all sails set and
          her booms to port?”

          “Oh, yes, Cap’n Duke,” cried the children. “And
          there is still more.”

          “What do you see, Johnny?” asked the captain.

          “Why, there is a battleship and a ferryboat, and
          over on the right I see the Statue of Liberty.”

          Cap’n Duke took off his specks, rubbed them with
          his red handkerchief and looked hard.

          “To be sure, to be sure,” he said. “And astern of
          the battleship there is a torpedo boat, and after
          that comes a school of whales and a yacht race.
          Never see the likes of that even in the Desert of
          Sahara.”

          In half an hour it was all over and the children
          went home for dinner. It was noised about Far
          Rockaway last night that really there was a
          beautiful mirage to be seen at sunset, and there
          was not a soul in the place who refused to believe
          it. Cap’n Duke and the children had seen it and
          that was enough.

          *       *       *       *       *

          STORY OF SAILOR

          _San Francisco Examiner_

          If you had done nothing worse than going to sleep
          in an out-of-the-way place on a bay steamer and
          awakening to find yourself in State’s prison with
          a fifteen-year sentence hanging over your head, how
          would you feel?

          John Larsen had such an experience last Friday. He
          was, and may yet be, a deckhand on the schooner
          Mary. He imbibed a quantity of refreshment on
          the water front and then hid away in the steamer
          Caroline for a quiet nap. He didn’t know that the
          Caroline was about to go over to San Quentin with
          a load of supplies for the prison. The first thing
          he did know was that a husky guard with a big gun
          was prodding him into wakefulness and saying hard
          things. Captain Smith of the Caroline was standing
          near.

          “Yes, it’s that fifteen-year man, all right,” the
          guard said, as he gave Larsen a stiff jolt under
          the ribs.

          The sleepy sailor was yanked out into daylight and
          taken ashore, where he saw only prison walls and
          men in stripes all about him. He was marched to the
          office of the captain of the guard, the man beside
          him meanwhile commenting on the fine disguise
          Larsen wore. The poor sailor was dumb from fright,
          and could not make an intelligible protest. But
          when the officials looked him over, they laughed
          and told the guard to throw him out. He was not the
          man.

          “Ay scart lak djefoul ven woke oop in yale,” said
          Larsen yesterday after he had got back from San
          Quentin by ferry. “Ay ban sleep on bale yute in
          Caroline ven gun stick me in ribs an’ ay see mens
          vid stripes all aroond, an’ man vid gun say ay ban
          fifteen-year faller. You bat heart went in boots
          and ay ban sick. Ven man stick gun in ribs an’ say
          ‘Git!’ You bat ay coom quick avay. No more sleep in
          Caroline on bale yute, you bat!”

          *       *       *       *       *

          A STOWAWAY

          _Boston Journal_

          Abraham Grabau wanted to get into the United States
          mighty badly.

          He was poor and had never had a chance. But he had
          read a lot about America and thought how fine it
          would be to come here and retrieve himself and
          really do something worth while before it was too
          late.

          So at Port Said he hid away on board the steamship
          St. Patrick, which was bound for Boston from
          Yokohama.

          Of course he knew it wasn’t right to become a
          stowaway, but he couldn’t see what real harm there
          was in it. Besides, he hadn’t any money and it
          seemed to be the only thing that was left. And he
          never dreamed that the great free country beyond
          the seas often keeps worthy men outside its borders
          just because they haven’t the price of a ticket.

          But he learned many things that worried him from
          the St. Patrick’s crew during the passage, after he
          had made himself known, when he couldn’t starve any
          longer, and had been put to work.

          He was told that an alien stowaway has a mighty
          poor show of “getting by” with Uncle Sam--that, in
          fact, he hadn’t a chance on earth of being landed
          here. It nearly broke his heart, for there seemed
          to be no way out. But he finally found one--and
          why not? It was as good a way as any other. And,
          besides, he might win.

          While the St. Patrick lay at anchor off quarantine
          Thursday night, Abraham slipped off his shoes and
          stole on deck noiselessly. He placed his shoes
          on deck alongside the railing and pulled down a
          life-buoy.

          He gave a last look toward the lights that were
          twinkling on shore and dropped into the water.

          Next morning the shoes were found near where the
          life-buoy should have been.

          Of course the ship was searched, but Abraham was
          missing. Immigration officials at Long Wharf and
          the harbor police were notified of the escape. But
          there was no trace of the stowaway.

          Yesterday the Hebrew’s daring act was talked of
          admiringly in many quarters, and the hope was
          expressed that he had won. There is a slight chance
          that he was picked up and carried to safety. But
          those best informed declare that the little Hebrew
          has beyond a doubt reached the Port of Missing
          Men, where entry is never refused, even to the
          friendless and the hopeless and the forlorn.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SEARCH FOR LOST TREASURES

          _New York Sun_

          In the gray hours before the dawn this morning,
          when all Ulmer Park sleeps and nothing is heard
          along the reaches of Marine Basin but the crowing
          of the restless cocks, will slip from her moorings
          a low, rakish craft. With hawseholes muffled and
          silence cloths on port and starboard anchor,
          hatches muzzled and even the kick of her propeller
          smothered by a blanket, this phantom will speed
          past the clam factories and chowder distilleries
          out to the bounding main.

          Hush! ’Tis the Mayflower, onetime defender of
          the America’s cup, bearing her daring crew of
          gentleman adventurers down to the isles of spice
          and the bloodied seas where Morgan trod piratical
          quarterdecks and Teach snicked off the heads of
          treasure bearers. Skipper Scull is at the helm,
          Buck Harrison in the galley; four more, good men
          and true, stand in the port chains and shade their
          eyes as they scan the waters of Gravesend Bay for
          the police boat.

          Romance lies behind the horizon and the glint of
          the rising sun has the glint of Sir Henry’s gold.
          For, mark ye well, Skipper Scull has wrapped in
          tarpaulin, next to his open front undershirt,
          a chart. Red and blue is the chart; it marks a
          reef in the Caribbean; it limns in the sea the
          boundaries of a precious spot; it tells where lies
          the English corvette, Good Faith, out of Santo
          Domingo City in 1684 with five millions in plate
          and minted doubloons in her strong boxes.

          But who are these men, tried and found trusty, who
          sail with Skipper Scull on the converted yacht
          Mayflower out of Marine Basin this morning? Skipper
          Scull, Harvard, ’98, a venturesome soul who lived
          in Tokio many, many months, and who, wishing to be
          a war correspondent, finally was allowed to get
          as near as forty-five miles from the scene of a
          battle. Then there are Gordon Brown, Yale, ’01, who
          was captain of the football team that laid Harvard
          so low in 1900, Stephen Noyes, Harvard, ’03, H.
          L. Corbett, Harvard, ’03, Buck Harrison, Harvard,
          ’04, fullback, whose name was a terror to all
          opponents, and Roger Darby, Harvard, ’05, a tower
          of strength on the Crimson line in his time.

          Consider this, that Matsukata, whose father is
          a Baron in Japan and holds fief over hundreds
          of samurai, was offered a place in the intrepid
          crew--as cook. Matsukata yearned for adventure, but
          he could not so demean himself, and that is why
          Buck Harrison of the line holds his place in the
          galley when the Mayflower slips out of the Basin
          this morning.

          With the Mayflower steaming out of Gravesend Bay,
          nose to the south, there must come a hiatus in this
          tale, and the curtain of the past must be lifted,
          revealing dark and bloody scenes.

            .................
            .               .
            .    CURTAIN    .
            .               .
            .................

          It is a fair day in June, Anno Domini 1684, and
          the tropical palms that fringe the beach about
          Santo Domingo Bay are nodding in the breeze. [Santo
          Domingo Bay is used as a disguise of the real port,
          which it wouldn’t do to reveal.] All is astir about
          the wharf, for the good English corvette, Good
          Faith, is sailing this day for Plymouth, laden
          fair to the gunwales with plate of price, spoils
          of cathedrals in Mexico and hard minted gold in
          doubloons--and oh, yes, pieces of eight!--that is,
          the ransom of cities in Salvador and the Guineas.
          Spanish gold it is, torn from the grasp of bleeding
          men.

          A cheer, a roundelay as the anchor comes up, and
          with sails bellying and the crosses of St. George
          and St. Andrew whipping from the gaff, the Good
          Faith ploughs her way past the reef and out to sea.

          But wait! From around the bluff beyond the sea
          gate, which is hidden from the Good Faith by the
          rocky headland, come stealing two long feluccas.
          The brass of cannon glints from bow and taffrail;
          sails strain with the wind; the gorgeous banner of
          Spain streams from the mainsail peak.

          The watchers on the headlands of Santo Domingo City
          drop on their knees in prayer at the sight, for
          are not those two feluccas the sea vultures of
          Don Sebastian Fernando Hacienda y Juan Fernandez,
          plunderer of towns and pillager of altars?

          At gaze stand the citizens of Santo Domingo City as
          they watch the feluccas steal into the track of the
          Good Faith. Tortured with anxiety are these good
          folk when they behold the Good Faith swing about
          the headland and come into view of the dastard
          Spaniards. Now the Good Faith is aware of her
          peril. See her crowd the canvas on! See her leap
          to the tug of the wind and race for her life down,
          down the watery way to the horizon! The feluccas
          follow fast; they gain yard by yard; still they
          gain and yet still.

          The horizon rises and swallows up the Good Faith
          and the Don’s feluccas, mere dots on the horizon.

          Alack, never again did man set eyes on the Good
          Faith. Plymouth awaited her in vain; Santo Domingo
          City sent out sloops and men-o’-war to search for
          her. Never again did Don Sebastian ravage the
          coasts of Salvador and plunder the galleons of the
          Main. Men forgot that there had ever been a Good
          Faith or a Don Sebastian.

              *  *  *  *  *

          [Stars here indicate hiatus of 220 years.]

          A fisher of sponges, an American fisher of sponges,
          in sooth, is sailing his craft about the Caribbean
          in search of his prey. It is some years later.
          It is only a few years ago in fact. A storm
          comes roaring out of the Gulf, and the fisher of
          sponges with his native fishermen is driven in his
          cockleshell far, far out of his course. In the dead
          of night and the murk of the storm the boat is
          piled up on a reef and they rub elbows with death
          until the ruddy streaks of dawn come.

          Then this fisher of sponges, this American fisher
          of sponges--he was also a diver and he helped
          raise the Merrimac in Santiago harbor once--looked
          over the side of his boat and he saw down about
          fifteen feet in the blue water the prow of a ship.
          Straightway he dived. He came up with pieces of
          eight sticking through the cracks of both fists, or
          maybe it was doubloons.

          Forthwith all of his native fishermen dived,
          and they came up with silver and golden coin
          representing maybe $1,221.34 American, who knows?

          They dived again and brought up the ship’s bell.
          About the rust eaten rim was graven this motto:

          “Good Faith yclept Dom. 1680 Plymouth. Ringeth this
          Belle God’s hours and telleyeth man’s life Space.”

          Straightway did this American fisher of sponges get
          him his sextant and his latitude. He had to guess
          at the longitude. Then with the ship’s bell and the
          pieces of eight he sailed to Jamaica.

          There he found one who was interested in his tale.
          Together they went to a lawyer, and he recommended
          them to another lawyer, whose name is Reginald R.
          Leaycraft and whose office is at 129 Pearl street,
          this city. Many old records in Santo Domingo City
          and in England were gone over, so say this fisher
          of sponges and his lawyer, and at last the shipping
          register of the original Good Faith was discovered.
          Then they knew of her fatal journey out of Santo
          Domingo City on that June afternoon so long ago,
          and knew, so say both, of the treasure that was in
          her bottom.

          Skipper Scull, and he alone, knows how it was
          that the sponge diver happened to meet such an
          adventurous spirit as himself here in New York.
          Yet, hark ye, within a month after the sponge
          fisher and Skipper Scull had met fortuitously,
          all of those other brave gentlemen and true from
          Harvard and Yale had met to form a solemn bond and
          compact.

          This was the bond and compact: That the
          organization should be made under the auspices of
          the Southern Research Company, a duly registered
          organization; that the sponge fisher and his lawyer
          should have share and share alike with the others;
          that the sponge fisher should be one of the party
          of discovery, in that he knew best how to interpret
          the chart that he had made that blue morning after
          the storm; and that, chief of all, Matsukata, the
          man whose father is a baron in Japan, should be
          cook.

          All of these conditions, save the last, so
          recalcitrant did Matsukata prove, were fulfilled
          to the letter. Then went the representatives of
          the company to Mrs. Eva M. Barker, the owner of the
          old cup defender, Mayflower. Five years ago the
          old defender had been converted into a sloop with
          auxiliary power. The Mayflower was brought around
          to the Marine Basin and all sorts of strange stores
          in boxes and crates were lowered into her hold.
          Diving suits flopped upon her decks and grappling
          hooks shoved their prongs through burlap sacking.

          Skipper Scull was there on the deck of the
          Mayflower each day to shoo away the curious and
          to scowl at the prying. Not a word would the war
          correspondent skipper say to the most veiled
          interrogations. Until the Mayflower slipped past
          the chowder distilleries in this morning’s early
          light the mystery of her mission and her bourne
          remained inviolate.

          But Skipper Scull, Buck Harrison and the rest have
          overreached themselves in their secretiveness. For
          know that over a long glass clinking with ice one
          sleepy night up at the Harvard Club on Forty-fourth
          street one of the sextette of adventurers revealed
          the scheme of the expedition. That is why not even
          Skipper Scull knows what fell plot is now a-brewing
          to rob him of his putative treasure.

          This is the plot: Up in Boston lives Alexander
          Forbes, the grandson of John Murray Forbes. He is
          the possessor of the yacht Merlin. To his ears
          came the tale of the treasure hunt. Not long did
          the grass grow under the Forbes foot. He called
          together the following men, known to be desperate
          pirates: Jim Field, Harvard, ’03; Donald Gregg,
          Harvard, ’02; Ralph Page, Harvard, ’03; Buz Baird,
          Harvard, ’04, and W. Davis Conrad, also of Harvard.
          To them he broached his counter plot, and all
          gleefully agreed, if they did not sign a pact with
          their life blood.

          So it will be--and one of these Boston pirates
          said yesterday that it cannot but be--that
          after the Mayflower has gone to her all but
          secret destination in the Caribbean and is
          sailing homeward, either laden with gold or with
          experience, the yacht Merlin will one day stalk out
          of the horizon and confront her. The Jolly Roger
          will fly from the peak of the Merlin and a six
          pounder will cough out demand for the Mayflower’s
          surrender. The Mayflower will have to heave to
          and be robbed or go to the bottom with all of her
          gallant gentlemen adventurers weltering in their
          own blood.

          It will be about three weeks hence, so swore this
          Boston pirate by book and ring yesterday, that the
          Merlin will sail on her fell mission. After that
          the Spanish Main will roar again and bloody death
          will be abroad over the mellifluous waters of the
          Gulf stream.

          *       *       *       *       *

          RELIEF SHIP

          _New York Evening Post_

          Capt. Pickels--“Pickels of the schooner Cluett,”
          as they called him on the Labrador coast--standing
          on the deck of that stanch little vessel, which
          will soon be bucking ice in Baffin Bay, is not
          the figure of an Arctic explorer. To the mildly
          interested visitor to the East River dock, where
          his ship was moored, there was nothing about the
          square-set skipper in shirt sleeves and straw
          hat, watching supplies come aboard, to suggest
          that he is the man selected to command the
          relief expedition which will search for Donald
          B. MacMillan, starting to-day. MacMillan set out
          from New York just two years ago to find mythical
          Crocker Land, and now the American Museum of
          Natural History, one of the chief backers of his
          expedition, is sending Pickels to find MacMillan.

          Both the captain in summer city garb and his little
          schooner, dwarfed by the overhanging pier, and not
          so different to the unpracticed eye from hundreds
          of sailing craft loading here, refused at first to
          fit into the picture which he painted in simple
          language of the months ahead. Within a few weeks
          the Cluett will be feeling out open reaches in
          the ice which is rarely absent after Nachvak Bay,
          on the north Labrador coast, is passed, laying a
          course almost due north up Davis Strait. Thence to
          Melville Bay, near Etah, the MacMillan expedition’s
          base, it will be nip and tuck between the Cluett
          and rapidly descending winter. She will be late,
          and, skirting the ever-present “middle ice” of
          Baffin Bay, on a course not far off shore, she will
          be lucky to reach her objective before the waters
          close entirely.

          And luckier still if she finds MacMillan and
          his party waiting. For then there is the chance
          that, with more good fortune and able seamanship,
          Capt. Pickels may be able to bring all hands out
          through the thin crust which by September will
          cover all those waters. In that event he will
          have made a season’s record to be very proud of.
          What is far more likely--and that is the reason
          for the two years’ supply of foodstuffs on board
          the Cluett--the schooner will nose her way into
          Melville Bay with hardly enough time in which to
          select a winter berth in the ice. If MacMillan has
          to be waited for or search made for him, the long
          winter will make either task easy. The diminutive,
          unpretentious wooden sailing ship which now reeks
          of oil and ship stores under the warm sun, will
          then find herself encompassed with leagues of ice.
          Eskimo ice huts will spring up around her like
          mushrooms, and in the long Arctic night it would be
          difficult to identify the little Cluett with the
          picture at the foot of East 21st Street.

          But closer acquaintance with Pickels and the Cluett
          helps one’s imagination to bridge the gap. Ever
          since she was built at Tottenville, some four
          years ago, for the Grenfell Mission service on the
          Labrador coast, Pickels has commanded her. She
          was designed for work in northern waters. As the
          bronze plate in the captain’s cabin sets forth,
          she was presented to Dr. Wilfred Grenfell in July,
          1911, by George B. Cluett, of Troy, N. Y. That she
          went to sea with purposes other than those of the
          ordinary trading schooner, the plate makes plain
          in these few words: “The Sea is His and He made
          It.” The inscription in the brass band which binds
          the wheel, “Jesus saith I will make you fishers of
          men,” serves to distinguish her from the run of
          fishing craft which infest the Labrador waters. But
          for these symbols of a higher vocation she is just
          like them, save that she is much more stanch.

          From stem to stern the Cluett measures 142 feet,
          and her beam is 26 feet. Every foot of timber
          in her is white oak. And back of the thin steel
          plate on her bows, where the impact of ice is
          concentrated, she can boast about two feet of solid
          timber. The outer shell forward is composed of
          white oak timbers eight inches thick. Behind them
          is nearly a foot of timbering, and then an inner
          shell of six-inch white oak all stiffened with
          drift bolts. The Cluett can be counted on to stand
          up to the force of her eighty horse-power kerosene
          engines, against all but solid ice. And she has
          proved it more than once.

          That brought the captain to the recital of an
          achievement which probably had much to do with the
          selection by the Museum authorities of him and
          his ship for the work in hand. Making ordinarily
          about three trips a year as supply ship to the
          chain of missions established by the Grenfell
          Association, it was no new thing for the Cluett to
          show her seaworthiness in ice and dirty weather.
          But last summer she did something out of the
          common. Chartered for a few months by the Carnegie
          Institution for magnetic investigations in Hudson’s
          Bay, she and Capt. Pickets displayed remarkable
          facility for edging into ice-strewn waters and
          slipping out with promptness.

          In a month’s time she made the circuit of Hudson’s
          Bay, undeterred by almost constant snow-storms and
          gales, frequently traversing untried waterways.
          She escaped without misadventure, where a less
          careful pilot might have lost his ship. Once the
          two principal members of the party, the observers,
          were swamped in a small boat. Losing instruments
          and all their equipment they went five days without
          food or fire, and owed their lives to Capt.
          Pickels’s prompt appearance with relief. Getting
          into Hudson’s Bay in mid-summer of last year was
          not easy on account of the ice. After cleanly
          threading Hudson Strait, the Cluett encountered a
          Canadian icebreaker, smashed by the very element
          she was designed to combat, and breaking up. As
          this point was a long way south of his present
          destination, Capt. Pickels is mindful of what may
          be in store for him this summer. But he regards the
          MacMillan relief expedition with as much serenity
          as if it were one of his regular northern visits,
          and with as little timidity as might be expected
          from a mariner who has navigated every ocean and
          circumvented ice in Bering Sea as successfully as
          in Grenfell’s Tickle.

          Although the proved nimbleness of the Cluett leads
          her charterers to hope that she may slip into
          Melville Bay and out with the rescued MacMillan
          party in time to get back to New York in November,
          the way food supplies have been poured into her
          show that no chances are to be taken, in a locality
          where, as the captain remarked, “ye can’t fetch
          stuff from a grocery ’round the corner.’” He shed
          light upon what for a dozen men might be considered
          a two years’ food supply. Some two thousand pounds
          of beef, nearly half of it canned and the rest
          pickled in brine, and an almost equal quantity of
          mutton and pork, formed the backbone of the stores.
          Beans and potatoes and barrel on barrel of pilot
          bread set off this impressive meat supply, which
          winter hunting is to vary with fresh steaks and
          roasts.

          Several hundred pounds of coffee and a hundred of
          tea, onions and many gallons of lime juice to ward
          off scurvy, were important items; strangely enough,
          not a particle of chocolate or cocoa. A comment
          upon the rather small supply of milk--condensed,
          of course--as compared with, for one thing, three
          hundred pounds of rolled oats, drew from the hardy
          captain the explanation that crews in the North
          preferred molasses with their oatmeal, and of
          molasses he had nearly a hundred gallons.

          Perhaps these assurances of creature comfort have
          had their attractions. At any rate, Capt. Pickels
          has been pestered with would-be passengers who want
          to make the trip with him or put in a winter of
          hunting on Melville Bay. And they were not all men.
          One young person from Vassar sent a request. But
          Capt. Pickels will have none of them. So that, when
          he starts on the last leg of his journey north,
          with decks piled high with barrels of kerosene--the
          Cluett is to be stocked with nearly five thousand
          gallons of kerosene and 900 gallons of gasolene
          for her engines--the only person aboard beside his
          crew of eight hardy Nova Scotians, will be the
          representative of the Natural History Museum. Capt.
          Pickels’s Newfoundland dog “Chum” completes the
          list.

          *       *       *       *       *

          SQUIRREL

          _New York World_

          Somebody let a squirrel loose in City Hall Park
          yesterday, or more likely Saturday night, and as a
          result that part of the green grass plot just north
          of the Nathan Hale statue was the only busy section
          in the business district from 2 until 3 o’clock
          on the Sabbath. If there was one cat there were
          thirty. Of all sizes and conditions they ranged,
          hailing from Cherry Hill and other points. Toms,
          tabbies and kittens were all there, and in circles
          they sat about a big tree on which a gilt sign read
          “Ulmus Americanus.”

          Above, perched in the branches, was Mr. Squirrel.
          Intently he looked down at the cats and the crowd
          of park loungers and others leaning on the fence
          and flicked his gray tail saucily at the feline
          delegation. One venturesome Tom scooted up the
          tree, but when he began to crawl out on the branch
          on which “Brer” Squirrel sat the latter lightly
          jumped to an adjoining tree, not labelled, and
          chattered back at Tomcatus Cherryhillibus.

          The other cats with uplifted eyes watched the
          flight of the squirrel and camped under the second
          tree, while the crowd of human onlookers increased.
          The siege was getting interesting.

          “I wonder will the cats get him, Jimmie,” said one
          young woman, but the squirrel only kept on scolding
          to himself.

          Not long after a young man in a gray suit stepped
          over the fence and stood beneath the tree. He
          carried a small bag over one shoulder. The moment
          the squirrel saw him he ran down the tree and
          perched on the man’s other shoulder. When the man
          opened the bag he popped in, and they started off
          for a Jersey ferry.

          The disgusted cats dispersed and the crowd melted
          away.

          *       *       *       *       *

          POLICEMEN’S PET

          _Philadelphia Telegraph_

          Just as the “joker” tapped 12 o’clock today in the
          Trenton avenue and Dauphin street police station, a
          file of unhelmeted patrolmen marched silently into
          the back yard and reverently placed the remains of
          “Benny” in his last long resting place.

          For a moment they stood sad-eyed, while Bill Tufts,
          the old turnkey, softly dropped the earth upon the
          coffin, and then, when only a memory marked the
          spot near the patrol house where “Benny” slept,
          they went back to the roll-room and discussed in
          whispers the unexpected death.

          “Benny” died at 11.20 o’clock, despite the efforts
          of House Sergeant Site, who immersed him in fresh
          water and tried in every way to restore the
          fast-ebbing life. But a broken heart could not thus
          be appeased, for “Benny’s” heart had undoubtedly
          been broken when a younger rival for the affections
          of the bluecoats turned up in the station house not
          long ago.

          Old age might also have contributed toward the
          death, for “Benny” was 7½ years old, and his
          species never exist longer than seven years,
          according to Street Sergeant Murdock, who is well
          posted on the subject. “Benny” holds the record
          for age around the station house. There have been
          others of his ilk there constantly for fifteen
          years, but “Benny” was the longest liver of the
          entire crowd.

          “Benny” was a fan-tailed goldfish.

          *       *       *       *       *

          ZOO STORY

          _New York World_

          This rock shall fly from its firm base as soon as I.
                                      --Hippopotamus Pete.

          “He’s a pig-headed brute,” say the keepers in
          the Bronx Zoo after they have been up all night
          watching Pete, who weighs 1,300 pounds--more than
          four Tafts.

          “He’s a wise old guy,” say the keepers admiringly
          after they have slept and are wondering at Pete’s
          sagacity.

          Director Hornaday, of the Zoo, and the keepers
          fondly hope to remove Pete to-day from his old cage
          in the antelope house to his apartment in the new
          and splendid elephant house. But whether Pete goes
          or stays in the antelope house depends upon how
          hungry he was last night.

          The World has told of the futile efforts to move
          this Gibraltar of hippopotamus flesh. As a last
          resort, Director Hornaday has been starving Pete
          for two days and nights. When Pete is hungry he
          is very hungry, indeed. He eats a wagon load of
          provender a day, shovelling in the food as stokers
          shovel coal into a steamship’s furnace.

          Taking advantage of this, Director Hornaday had
          placed in Pete’s cage a “moving case,” a very
          strong box big enough to hold Pete. At one end of
          the box is a drop door rigged to a fall and tackle.
          At the closed end of the big box the keepers placed
          a tempting meal of all the things Pete likes best.

          It was all very simple. Two keepers watched Pete
          every hour of the twenty-four. Pete, hungry, was to
          walk into the box after the food, the keepers were
          to let the drop door fall and--there you are, or,
          rather, there Pete was.

          The simple plan did not work out well. By day Pete
          seemed to have lost all appetite. But by Saturday
          night he had thought out a plan in his turn. While
          the sleepy keepers watched, Pete entered the box,
          but he carefully stretched back his hind legs so
          that they remained outside it. The keepers dropped
          the door; it fell on Pete’s hind quarters.

          Pete backed out, scooping the food along with his
          fore legs. Once outside he had a hearty meal, which
          he seemed to enjoy exceedingly.

          They built a much longer moving case yesterday and
          put food at its closed end. A hippopotamus is not
          built like a dachshund. To get that food Pete must
          include his whole bulk in the box.

          *       *       *       *       *

          CAT

          _Chicago Inter Ocean_

          Tom Stroller is dead.

          Tom Stroller was only a cat, and he was old and
          ugly and never even had been allowed within the
          sacred precincts of a cat show, so, perhaps, it
          doesn’t matter much.

          And yet there were a hundred girls, students at the
          Art Institute, who looked wistfully at the desk of
          the Klio Club when they went to their lunch. And
          there were 100 others who didn’t smile as they sat
          about the tables. One or two attempted a eulogy,
          but the efforts were not inspiring, for the best
          that could be said of old Tom Stroller was that “he
          was such a friendly cat.”

          Time was when Tom was young and useful. Those were
          the days--twelve years ago--when there was a stern
          work to be done at the Klio Club, then at South
          Michigan Avenue and East Monroe Street. Those
          were the days when Tom stepped proudly through
          serried ranks of rodent dead, the days when he was
          tolerated because he was useful, and was forgiven
          his ugliness because he was so friendly. Those were
          the days when Tom achieved his first love--the love
          of Mrs. Bush, mother of the club.

          Side by side Tom and Mrs. Bush grew old together.
          When the girls at the institute moved their club
          to 26 South Wabash Avenue, Tom, now toothless, and
          Mrs. Bush, now almost at the end of the road, were
          established together at the cashier’s desk.

          New students came to look amused and remained to
          love them both. Old students came back to Chicago
          to rush up to the Klio Club and cry: “Why, if there
          aren’t Tom and Mother Bush. God bless you both!”

          But one day last year Mrs. Bush was stricken with
          an illness that soon may prove fatal. She was taken
          to the Mary Thompson Hospital and a new cashier
          came to the club’s desk. She was kind to Tom and
          stroked his grizzled fur, but things were different
          now, and Tom began to grow old very fast. He died
          yesterday morning.

          *       *       *       *       *

          DOG

          _Chicago Herald_

          Colonel is only a dog, but he is believed to be
          dying because he did his duty.

          Colonel is a dignified St. Bernard, with a fine
          head and kindly eye. He belongs to Sven Carlson,
          a saloon-keeper at 3300 North Racine avenue. When
          Colonel could lie on the floor, keeping one eye on
          the door and the other on his master, the dog was
          happy.

          Carlson was proud of Colonel, too. He boasted
          of the dog’s cleverness--how he would fetch and
          carry from the grocer’s, and even carry notes to
          tradesmen in the neighborhood. Colonel never failed
          to go to the right store.

          It was for Carlson that the dog sacrificed himself.

          A few minutes before closing time Saturday night
          Carlson went behind the bar and Colonel followed
          him.

          Two men entered the saloon and walked over to the
          bar. They did not see the dog.

          “Hands up,” ordered one man.

          “It’s late, gentlemen; if you wish to drink you
          have no time for such joking,” replied Carlson.

          Both men drew revolvers.

          “It’s a long way from a joke,” said the man. “Hands
          up or we’ll shoot.”

          “Go for ’em, Colonel,” ordered Carlson.

          The dog sped around the end of the bar as though he
          had been shot from a catapult, his hair bristling,
          uttering deep growls; and the bandits backed away.

          Then one of the men fired a shot, and the dog
          toppled over and lay still.

          Carlson gave a roar of rage when he saw Colonel
          fall, and, grasping a bung starter, climbed over
          the bar.

          The holdups fled.

          Carlson chased them a block before he gave up the
          pursuit.

          Colonel was taken to Thomas Kendrew’s veterinary
          hospital at 3039 Sheffield avenue, bandaged and put
          into a private kennel with clean, sweet straw to
          lie upon.

          “He surely will die,” said Dr. Kendrew. “I think
          there is no hope for him. The bullet went into his
          hip and through some of his vital organs.

          “If every man could die as gallantly as Colonel
          this would be a better world.”

          *       *       *       *       *

          TRICK MULE

          _Kansas City Star_

          If you’ve been to the horse show this week you’ve
          seen Henry and Zip. Henry--his last name is
          Harbaugh--is 18 years old and lives near Bedford,
          Mo., when he’s at home. Zip is 8 years old, and if
          you don’t believe he’s the most wonderful trick
          mule in the world, you’d better not mention it to
          Henry.

          Zip knows how to sit up on his haunches like a
          rabbit and walk around on his hind legs with Henry
          on his back, and walk across the tanbark arena on
          his knees, and--oh, innumerable things. Also he can
          buck in the most humorous way--you’re quite sure
          nobody but Henry could stick on.

          There’s an interesting story connected with Henry
          and Zip. Zip is an educated mule, and he is helping
          make Henry an educated boy. For, the money that
          Henry receives for his talents and Zip’s goes for
          Henry’s education. The boy is half way through the
          high school at Avalon, Mo., and when he finishes,
          he hopes to go to the University of Missouri.
          And the talented Zip is a great help to a fellow
          who’s trying to get an education. For Henry is
          drawing down $50 and expenses for his week’s work
          at the Kansas City Horse Show, and he has hopes of
          repeating the performance at St. Louis next week.

          Col. W. V. Galbraith, general manager of the horse
          show, got a letter from the trick mule’s owner
          last week. The letter told about all the wonderful
          things Zip could do--and he can, too--and said if
          the colonel could find a place for him, please to
          let Henry know at once, as it’s one hundred miles
          from Bedford to Kansas City, and it would take some
          little time to ride. The boy, having no money to
          spend on railroad fare, proposed to ride his mule
          to Kansas City. The colonel was so pleased by the
          boy’s enterprise that he sent him word to come and
          enclosed money to bring Zip by railroad. Of course,
          strictly speaking, a mule doesn’t belong in a horse
          show, but Colonel Galbraith figured that a trick
          mule named Zip was too good a bet to overlook.

          The boy started training his mule five years ago,
          when he was 13 years old and Zip was 3. Henry lived
          on a farm and he had no brothers and sisters. So
          he made a pet of Zip, and taught him all sorts of
          tricks. Then he began showing him at county fairs
          and saving the money that he got to spend for
          education. One of these days he hopes to be as well
          educated for a boy as Zip is for a mule. And if
          they gave degrees to mules, Zip would certainly be
          a Ph.D.

          Zip is also quite a teacher. He has taught this
          country boy a philosophy of life.

          “You have to be patient--patient and kind,” Henry
          said yesterday. “The first thing I ever taught Zip
          took me two hours and a half. I wanted to see if
          I could make him lie down. I grabbed his opposite
          foreleg and held it up. I just had to tire him out,
          but at last he keeled over. Next day he did it in
          two minutes. He had learned what I wanted. It was
          easy after that.”

          Henry had never seen a trick mule, but he began
          thinking of other tricks. With infinite patience he
          showed Zip what was wanted.

          “Then he did it because he loved me,” said the boy
          simply.

          Henry never uses a whip to teach Zip tricks. He
          feeds him sugar, and is just kind to him and works
          with him and is patient. Now he learns faster
          than ever. You can teach an old mule new tricks,
          according to Henry.




INDEX TO NEWS STORIES


  Accident, automobile, 23, 24.

  Accident, drowning, 39, 40, 42.

  Accident, fall from scaffold, 39.

  Accident, humorous treatment of, 25.

  Accident, marine, 32, 34, 35.

  Accident, mine, 36, 38.

  Accident, pathetic treatment of, 25.

  Accident, railroad, 29, 30, 31.

  Accident, shooting, 42.

  Accident, storm, 35, 196.

  Accident, subway, 26.

  Accidents, 22-44.

  Addresses, 127-131.

  Adoption of child, 100.

  Agricultural fair, 143.

  Alumnae meeting, 228.

  Animal stories, 19, 256-259.

  Anniversary, church celebration of, 228.

  Arrest for embezzlement, 50.

  Arrest for forgery, 49.

  Arrest for hold-up, 55, 56, 57.

  Arrest for intoxication, 48.

  Arrest for murder, 59, 65.

  Arrest for passing worthless checks, 50.

  Arrest for swindle, 49.

  Arrest, humorous treatment of, 48.

  Arrest, pathetic treatment of, 57.

  “Asleep at the switch,” 48.

  Assignment in bankruptcy, 96.

  Attorney general, opinion of, 90.

  Automobile bandits, 55.

  Automobile collision, 23, 24.

  Automobile drivers’ strike, 187.

  Automobile ordinance, violation of, 78.

  Automobile parade, 149, 150.

  Automobile show, opening of, 142.


  Bandit, automobile, 55.

  Bandit, pathetic story of, 57.

  Bandit, street car, 57.

  Bankruptcy case, 95, 96.

  Banquet, 157.

  Baseball, 212-216.

  Baseball game, humorous treatment of, 215.

  Bazaar, charity, 230.

  Bonds, sale of municipal, 245.

  _Boston Advertiser_, story from, 25.

  _Boston Globe_, story from, 212.

  _Boston Herald_, stories from, 23, 40, 143, 171, 246.

  _Boston Journal_, story from, 251.

  _Boston Post_, story from, 212.

  _Boston Transcript_, stories from, 16, 18, 34, 138, 192,
      219, 224, 239, 240, 244, 247.

  _Boston Traveler_, story from, 29.

  Bridge party, 229.

  _Brooklyn Eagle_, stories from, 42, 88.

  Building of new hotel, 244.

  Burglary, 54.

  Burglary, human interest treatment of, 54.

  Business merger, 242.


  Card party, 228, 229.

  Carnegie, Andrew, toast by, at banquet, 157.

  Cat, death of, 258.

  Cathedral service, anniversary, 160.

  Charity bazaar, 230.

  _Chicago Daily News_, stories from, 68, 136.

  _Chicago Evening Post_, stories from, 102, 226, 228, 229.

  _Chicago Herald_, stories from, 47, 54, 55, 66, 91, 95, 105,
      115, 120, 222, 223, 227, 228, 229, 234, 236, 258.

  _Chicago Inter Ocean_, stories from, 67, 108, 109, 171, 222, 258.

  _Chicago Record-Herald_, stories from, 37, 146, 184.

  _Chicago Tribune_, stories from, 19, 39, 42, 73, 105, 130, 137,
      138, 164, 187, 188, 244, 246.

  Children, news stories of, 25, 26, 39, 41, 42, 43, 47, 54, 154,
      158, 159, 250.

  Children’s court, 79.

  Chinese girls in court, 79.

  _Christian Science Monitor_, stories from, 217, 235.

  Christmas dinner, family reunion at, 227.

  Christmas in children’s hospital, 154.

  Christmas pantomime, 155.

  Christmas, preparations for celebrating, 152.

  Church, anniversary celebration in, 160.

  City bonds, sale of, 245.

  City council meeting, 117.

  College alumnae meeting, 228.

  College class day, 166.

  College commencement, 162-166.

  College crew prospects, 216.

  College crew races, 217.

  College fraternity dinner, 226.

  College glee club, entertainment for, 229.

  Collision, automobile, 23, 24.

  Collision, railroad, 30, 31.

  Collision, ships in, 34.

  Colorado miners’ strike, 188.

  Colorado miners’ strike, investigation of, 108.

  Commencement exercises, college, 162-166.

  Common council meeting, 117.

  Conventions, 119-123.

  Convict, capture of escaped, 67.

  Convict, pathetic story of escaped, 68.

  Council, meeting of city, 117.

  Counterfeiter, human interest story of, 83.

  County fair, 143.

  Court decisions, 88, 89, 90.

  Court, pathetic story of, 78.

  Court, police, 78.

  Courts, civil, 88-105.

  Courts, criminal, 81-87.

  Courtship, unusual, 221, 222.

  Crew, prospects of college, 216.

  Crew races, college, 217.


  Dancing parties, 226, 227, 228.

  Deaths, 171-177.

  Decision, court, 88, 89, 90.

  Decoration Day parade, 151.

  Defalcation of bank clerk, 51.

  Delinquency of young girl, 66.

  _Detroit News_, stories from, 83, 94.

  Dinner parties, 226, 227.

  Disorderly conduct, arrest for, 58.

  Divers, death of, in ship’s hold, 32.

  Dividend, railroad company’s, 246.

  Divorce suit, 93, 94.

  Docks, stories from, 250-254.

  Dog, death of, 258.

  Drowning, 39-42, 196.

  _Duluth Herald_, stories from, 87, 89.


  Easter, 193.

  Eclipse of sun, 197.

  Elections, 179-184.

  Election day, 180.

  Election, forecast of, 179.

  Election, returns of city, 183.

  Election, returns of state, 182, 183.

  Elopement, 223.

  Embezzlement, 51.

  Engagement, announcement of, 226.

  Entertainment, Christmas, in hospital, 154.

  Entertainment, Christmas pantomime, 153.

  Entertainment for charity, 230.

  Entertainment in children’s hospital, 158.

  Entertainment, lawn fête, 159.

  Entertainment, school, 158.

  Exhibitions, 142.

  Explosion, cause of fire, 16, 19.

  Explosion in fireworks plant, 19.

  Explosion in mine, 36.

  Explosion in subway, 26.

  Explosion in tannery, 16.


  Failure, commercial, 95, 96.

  Fair, agricultural, 143.

  Fall from scaffold, 39.

  Fête, lawn, 159.

  Fight on elevated train, 58.

  Fight on wagon, 78.

  Financial news, 245, 246.

  Fire, fatal, in factory, 19.

  Fire, fatal, in lodging house, 21.

  Fire, fatal, in tenement, 21.

  Fire in university building, 17.

  Fire, investigation of cause of, 18, 21, 22.

  Fires, 16-22.

  Football, 202-212.

  Football game, 205, 207.

  Football game, analysis of, 209.

  Football game, day of, 202, 203.

  Forgery, 49, 50, 78.

  Forgery, pathetic treatment of, 78.


  Golf match, 219.


  Hearing before investigating committee, 108, 110.

  Hearing in investigation, pathetic treatment of, 110.

  Hearing on city ordinance, 112, 113, 115.

  Hearing on ordinance, humorous treatment of, 113.

  Highway robbery, 55.

  Hippopotamus, story of, 257.

  Hold-up, 55, 56, 57.

  Hospital, Christmas in children’s, 154.

  Hospital, entertainment in children’s, 158.

  Hospital, surgical operation in, 170.

  Hotel, new, 244.

  Hotel story, humorous, 249.

  Humorous stories, 25, 47, 48, 55, 57, 58, 78, 91, 92, 113, 121,
      122, 142, 150, 156, 157, 198, 215, 222, 249, 250, 252.


  Illness, 168.

  Indian, dying, 169.

  _Indianapolis News_, stories from, 133, 134.

  Insanity case in court, 91.

  Inspection, medical, of schools, 236.

  Interview with educator, 134.

  Interview with official, 133.

  Interview with opera singer, 136.

  Interview with woman philanthropist, 135.

  Interviews, 133-137.

  Interviews, group of, 137.

  Investigation, congressional, of strike, 108.

  Investigation of drowning, 40.

  Investigation of fire, 18, 21, 22.

  Investigation of strike, 108, 110.

  Investigation, pathetic treatment of, 110.


  Jubilee service in cathedral, 160.

  Juvenile delinquency, 66.


  _Kansas City Star_, stories from, 38, 49, 51, 56, 57, 60, 62, 65,
      66, 78, 100, 127, 130, 135, 168, 172, 218, 227, 228, 235, 259.

  _Kansas City Times_, stories from, 159, 171.


  Labor difficulties and strikes, 186-190.

  Larceny, conviction for, 87.

  Law suit, humorous treatment of, 92.

  Lawn fête, 159.

  Lawrence, Mass., textile strike at, 190.

  Lecture, 131.

  Legislature, meeting of state, 116.

  Library, public, 237.

  _Los Angeles Times_, story from, 57.

  Luncheon, 228.


  _Madison Democrat_, stories from, 121, 129.

  Mann Act, violation of, 66.

  Manual training school, opening of, 234.

  Manufacturing, new method in, 243.

  Marine news stories, 32, 34, 35, 250, 251, 252, 254.

  Market, opening of, 145.

  Market prices, retail, 246, 247.

  Mawson, Sir Douglas, lecture by, 131.

  Medical inspection in schools, 236.

  Meeting of city council, 117.

  Meeting of Friends, 123.

  Meeting of old clothes men, 122.

  Meeting of safety council, 120.

  Meeting of state legislature, 116.

  Meetings, 116-123.

  Memorial Day parade, 151.

  Merger of business concerns, 242.

  _Milwaukee Daily News_, stories from, 31, 43.

  _Milwaukee Evening Wisconsin_, stories from, 43, 55, 156.

  _Milwaukee Free Press_, stories from, 110, 137, 168.

  _Milwaukee Journal_, stories from, 29, 44.

  _Milwaukee Sentinel_, stories from, 30, 73, 78, 82, 170, 237, 242.

  Mine explosion, 36, 38.

  Miners, attempt to rescue, 38.

  Miners, strike of, 188.

  Mirage, 250.

  Mule, trick, 259.

  Municipal bonds, sale of, 245.

  Municipal equipment, new, 240.

  Municipal improvements, 239.

  Murder, constructive treatment of, 60, 62, 63, 65.

  Murder, pathetic treatment of, 63, 65.

  Murder trial, 84.

  Murders, 58-66.

  Museum, public, 238.

  Musicale, 228.


  Nelson, William Rockhill, death of, 176.

  _New York Evening Mail_, stories from, 70, 158.

  _New York Evening Post_, stories from, 22, 74, 123, 138, 142, 147,
      160, 162, 165, 174, 177, 187, 195, 202, 203, 209, 254.

  _New York Evening Telegram_, story from, 93.

  _New York Globe_, stories from, 236, 249.

  _New York Herald_, stories from, 103, 112, 131, 149, 186, 194, 225,
      227, 230, 241, 249.

  _New York Sun_, stories from, 33, 61, 63, 79, 84, 92, 100, 122, 166,
      250, 252.

  _New York Times_, stories from, 17, 21, 26, 35, 39, 48, 72, 96, 98,
      113, 119, 128, 142, 145, 151, 155, 158, 173, 180, 183, 190, 196,
      215, 216, 224, 226, 230, 238, 250.

  _New York Tribune_, stories from, 24, 32, 49, 59.

  _New York World_, stories from, 21, 41, 48, 58, 61, 71, 81, 99, 150,
      157, 182, 233, 256, 257.


  Obituaries, 172-177.

  Obituary of college dean, 177.

  Obituary of editor, 176.

  Obituary of fireman, 172.

  Obituary of Italian undertaker, 174.

  Obituary of politician, 173.

  Obituary of William Rockhill Nelson, 176.

  _Ohio State Journal_, story from, 121.

  Old clothes men, meeting of, 117.

  Operation, surgical, 170.

  Opinion of attorney general, 90.

  Ordinance, hearing on, 112, 113, 115.

  Ordinance introduced in city council meeting, 117.

  Ordinance, opposition to proposed, 118.


  Pantomime, Christmas, 154.

  Parade, automobile, 149, 150.

  Parade, Memorial Day, 151.

  Parties, social, 227-229.

  Patent case, award in, 98.

  Pathetic news stories, 25, 38, 42, 57, 63, 65, 68, 72, 73, 78,
      110, 168.

  Penitentiary convict, escaped, 67, 68.

  _Philadelphia Inquirer_, story from, 170.

  _Philadelphia Ledger_, stories from, 35, 117, 118, 176, 202, 225,
      228, 229, 244.

  _Philadelphia Telegraph_, story from, 257.

  Police court case, 78.

  Police news stories, 47-74.

  Poultry show, opening of, 142.

  Probate court case, 100, 104, 105.

  _Providence Journal_, story from, 154.


  Railroad accidents, 29-31.

  Railroad company declares dividend, 246.

  Railroad wreck, fatal, 30, 31.

  Railroad’s safety campaign, 241.

  Real estate transactions, 244.

  Receivership proceedings, 95.

  Regatta of college crews, 217.

  Report of federal bureau, 138.

  Report of federal official, 139.

  Report of scientist, 138.

  Rescue of drowning man, 41.

  Robbery by automobile bandits, 55.

  Robbery, highway, 55.

  Robbery, hold-up, 56, 57.

  Robbery, pathetic treatment of, 57.

  Robbery, story of, told in court, 82.

  Rowing, college crew races, 217.

  Rowing, prospects of college crew, 216.

  Runaway boy, 47.

  Runaway boy in court, 81.

  Runaway, heroism of policeman in, 22.

  Runaway, humorous treatment of, 25.


  Safety campaign by railroad, 241.

  Safety council meeting, 120.

  Sailor, story of, 250.

  _St. Louis Globe-Democrat_, stories from, 131, 183.

  _St. Louis Post Dispatch_, story from, 116.

  _San Francisco Chronicle_, stories from, 54, 90, 139.

  _San Francisco Examiner_, stories from, 25, 36, 250.

  School entertainment, 158.

  School for backward children, 235.

  School, new manual training, 234.

  School, new vocational, 234.

  Schools, 233-236.

  Schools, medical inspection in, 236.

  Schools, new method of spelling in, 134.

  Schools, opening of new, 234.

  Schools, opening of public, 233.

  Schools, reading in, 235.

  Schools, reading tests in, 236.

  Search for lost child, 43.

  Search for lost treasure, 252.

  Separation, suit for, 93.

  Sermon, 160.

  Ship battered by gale, 35.

  Ship, divers die in hold of, 32.

  Ship news stories, 32, 34, 35, 250, 251, 252, 254.

  Ships, collision of, 34.

  Shipwreck, 35.

  Shooting accident, 42.

  Shooting, murders by, 58-66.

  Shows, automobile, poultry, etc., 142.

  Snow storm, 193.

  Speeches, 127-130.

  Sporting news, 200-220.

  Sporting news, baseball, 212-216.

  Sporting news, football, 202-212.

  Sporting news, golf match, 219.

  Sporting news, rowing, 216, 217.

  Sporting news, tennis match, 218.

  Spring, first day of, 194.

  _Springfield Republican_, stories from, 104, 172, 179, 193,
      205, 207, 240, 248.

  Squirrel in city hall park, 256.

  Statue, unveiling of, 147.

  Storm batters fishing vessel, 35.

  Storm causes shipwreck, 35.

  Storm damages building, 196.

  Storm, snow, 193.

  Storm, wind, 196.

  Stowaway, 251.

  Street car accident, 24, 25.

  Street car bandit, pathetic story of, 57.

  Street car collision with automobile, 24.

  Street car kills boy, 25.

  Street improvements, 240.

  Strike at Lawrence, Mass., 190.

  Strike, congressional investigation of, 108.

  Strike, investigation of, 110.

  Strike of Colorado miners, 188.

  Strike of taxicab drivers, 187.

  Strike of textile workers, 190.

  Strike of wholesale grocers’ employes, 187.

  Strike, possibility of, 186.

  Strikes, 186-190.

  Subway, accident in, 26.

  Subway, human interest story of, 250.

  Suicide attempted by schoolgirl, 73.

  Suicide, cause of attempted, 74.

  Suicide of business man, 70.

  Suicide of old couple, 71.

  Suicide of seamstress, 73.

  Suicide, pathetic treatment of, 72, 73.

  Suicides, 70-74.

  Suit at law, humorous treatment of, 92.

  Supreme court decision, 88, 89, 90.

  Supreme court decision, human interest treatment of, 89.

  Surgical operation, 70.

  Swindle, 49.


  Taxicab drivers’ strike, 187.

  Tennis match, 218.

  Theatre parties, 228.

  Toast at banquet, 157.

  _Topeka Capital_, stories from, 50, 226.

  Train derailed, 29.

  Train wreck, fatal, 30, 31.

  Trick mule, 259.

  Tunnel, opening of, 146.


  University building destroyed by fire, 17.

  University class day, 166.

  University commencement, 162-166.

  Unveiling of statue, 147.


  Vocational school, opening of, 234.

  Vote, forecast of state, 179.

  Vote on state-wide prohibition, 184.

  Voting, election day, 180.


  _Washington Herald_, story from, 197.

  _Washington Post_, story from, 198.

  _Washington Times_, story from, 152.

  Wayward girl, 66.

  Weather, 192-199.

  Weather, cold summer, 195.

  Weather, first winter, 192.

  Weather, high wind, 196.

  Weather, snow storm, 193.

  Weather, spring, 194.

  Wedding, elopement, 223.

  Wedding of cowboy, 222.

  Wedding of septuagenarians, 223.

  Wedding, result of unusual romance, 222.

  Weddings, 221-226.

  Wharves, stories from, 250-254.

  Will admitted to probate, 100, 104.

  Will, suit to break, 103.

  Wilson, speech by President, 128, 130.

  Wind, accidents due to, 196.

  Winter weather, 192, 193.

  _Wisconsin State Journal_, story from, 90.


  Zoo story, 257.




Transcriber’s Note:

While the width of the articles given within is narrower than regular
text in this ebook, the column width as printed in the original
publication has not been retained.

Punctuation has been standardised. Alternative spelling and variations
in hyphenation, and punctuation have been retained as in the original
publication except as follows:

  Page 29
    surpervising engineer is _changed to_
    supervising engineer is

  Page 34
    before Coronor Acritelli _changed to_
    before Coroner Acritelli

  Page 39
    susbcriptions to pay the men _changed to_
    subscriptions to pay the men

  Page 43
    neighborhoood for a time _changed to_
    neighborhood for a time

  Page 53
    at the insistance of the man _changed to_
    at the insistence of the man

  Page 118
    Philadephia Ledger _changed to_
    Philadelphia Ledger

  Page 229
    DEBUTANTE’S PARTY _changed to_
    DÉBUTANTE’S PARTY

  Page 248
    and canteloupes 8 to 10 _changed to_
    and cantaloupes 8 to 10





End of Project Gutenberg's Types of News Writing, by Willard Grosvenor Bleyer



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TYPES OF NEWS WRITING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


