The Project Gutenberg eBook of Carry On, Jeeves
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Carry On, Jeeves

Author: P. G. Wodehouse

Release date: August 1, 2021 [eBook #65974]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARRY ON, JEEVES ***

                           Carry on, Jeeves

                            P.G. Wodehouse

                             PENGUIN BOOKS

                    Published by the Penguin Group

        Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

 Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA

     Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell,
                       Victoria 3124, Australia

     Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario,
                            Canada M4V 3B2

  Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park,
                       New Delhi--110 017, India

   Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads, Albany,
                         Auckland, New Zealand

      Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,
                      Rosebank 2196, South Africa

  Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL,
                                England

                            www.penguin.com

     First published in Great Britain by Herbert Jenkins Ltd 1925
                    Published in Penguin Books 1957
                      This edition published 1999
                                  30

           Copyright by the Trustees of the Wodehouse Estate
                          All rights reserved

            The moral right of the author has been asserted

                     Set in 9/11pt Monotype Trump
               Typeset by Rowland Phototypesetting Ltd,
                       Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk
             Printed in England by Clays Ltd, St Ives plc

 Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to
the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent,
  re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's
   prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in
 which it is published and without a similar condition including this
         condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

                      ISBN-13: 978-0-140-28408-9
                        ISBN-10: 0-140-28408-7

                 _All the characters in this book are
           purely imaginary and have no relation whatsoever
                   to any living person or persons_

                   *       *       *       *       *


                         TO BERNARD LE STRANGE




                               Contents


                     1--Jeeves Takes Charge                   1

                     2--The Artistic Career of Corky         27

                     3--Jeeves and the Unbidden Guest        46

                     4--Jeeves and the Hard-Boiled Egg       69

                     5--The Aunt and the Sluggard            91

                     6--The Rummy Affair of Old Biffy       121

                     7--Without the Option                  148

                     8--Fixing it for Freddie               176

                     9--Clustering Round Young Bingo        198

                    10--Bertie Changes his Mind             228

       *       *       *       *       *




                        1--Jeeves Takes Charge


Now, touching this business of old Jeeves--my man, you know--how do
we stand? Lots of people think I'm much too dependent on him. My Aunt
Agatha, in fact, has even gone so far as to call him my keeper. Well,
what I say is: Why not? The man's a genius. From the collar upward he
stands alone, I gave up trying to run my own affairs within a week of
his coming to me. That was about half a dozen years ago, directly after
the rather rummy business of Florence Craye, my Uncle Willoughby's
book, and Edwin, the Boy Scout.

The thing really began when I got back to Easeby, my uncle's place in
Shropshire. I was spending a week or so there, as I generally did in
the summer; and I had had to break my visit to come back to London
to get a new valet. I had found Meadowes, the fellow I had taken to
Easeby with me, sneaking my silk socks, a thing no bloke of spirit
could stick at any price. It transpiring, moreover, that he had looted
a lot of other things here and there about the place, I was reluctantly
compelled to hand the misguided blighter the mitten and go to London
to ask the registry office to dig up another specimen for my approval.
They sent me Jeeves.

I shall always remember the morning he came. It so happened that the
night before I had been present at a rather cheery little supper, and
I was feeling pretty rocky. On top of this I was trying to read a book
Florence Craye had given me. She had been one of the house-party at
Easeby, and two or three days before I left we had got engaged. I was
due back at the end of the week, and I knew she would expect me to
have finished the book by then. You see, she was particularly keen on
boosting me up a bit nearer her own plane of intellect. She was a girl
with a wonderful profile, but steeped to the gills in serious purpose.
I can't give you a better idea of the way things stood than by telling
you that the book she'd given me to read was called _Types of Ethical
Theory_, and that when I opened it at random I struck a page beginning:

    The postulate or common understanding involved in speech is
    certainly co-extensive, in the obligation it carries, with the
    social organism of which language is the instrument, and the ends
    of which it is an effort to subserve.

All perfectly true, no doubt; but not the sort of thing to spring on a
lad with a morning head.

I was doing my best to skim through this bright little volume when
the bell rang. I crawled off the sofa and opened the door. A kind of
darkish sort of respectful Johnnie stood without.

'I was sent by the agency, sir,' he said. 'I was given to understand
that you required a valet.'

I'd have preferred an undertaker; but I told him to stagger in, and
he floated noiselessly through the doorway like a healing zephyr.
That impressed me from the start. Meadowes had had flat feet and used
to clump. This fellow didn't seem to have any feet at all. He just
streamed in. He had a grave, sympathetic face, as if he, too, knew what
it was to sup with the lads.

'Excuse me, sir,' he said gently.

Then he seemed to flicker, and wasn't there any longer. I heard him
moving about in the kitchen, and presently he came back with a glass on
a tray.

'If you would drink this, sir,' he said, with a kind of bedside manner,
rather like the royal doctor shooting the bracer into the sick prince.
'It is a little preparation of my own invention. It is the Worcester
Sauce that gives it its colour. The raw egg makes it nutritious. The
red pepper gives it its bite. Gentlemen have told me they have found it
extremely invigorating after a late evening.'

I would have clutched at anything that looked like a lifeline that
morning. I swallowed the stuff. For a moment I felt as if somebody had
touched off a bomb inside the old bean and was strolling down my throat
with a lighted torch, and then everything seemed suddenly to get all
right. The sun shone in through the window; birds twittered in the
tree-tops; and, generally speaking, hope dawned once more.

'You're engaged!' I said, as soon as I could say anything.

I perceived clearly that this cove was one of the world's workers, the
sort no home should be without.

'Thank you, sir. My name is Jeeves.'

'You can start in at once?'

'Immediately, sir.'

'Because I'm due down at Easeby, in Shropshire, the day after tomorrow.'

'Very good, sir.' He looked past me at the mantelpiece. 'That is an
excellent likeness of Lady Florence Craye, sir. It is two years since
I saw her ladyship. I was at one time in Lord Worplesdon's employment.
I tendered my resignation because I could not see eye to eye with his
lordship in his desire to dine in dress trousers, a flannel shirt, and
a shooting coat.'

He couldn't tell me anything I didn't know about the old boy's
eccentricity. This Lord Worplesdon was Florence's father. He was the
old buster who, a few years later, came down to breakfast one morning,
lifted the first cover he saw, said 'Eggs! Eggs! Eggs! Damn all eggs!'
in an overwrought sort of voice, and instantly legged it for France,
never to return to the bosom of his family. This, mind you, being a bit
of luck for the bosom of the family, for old Worplesdon had the worst
temper in the county.

I had known the family ever since I was a kid, and from boyhood up this
old boy had put the fear of death into me. Time, the great healer,
could never remove from my memory the occasion when he found me--then
a stripling of fifteen--smoking one of his special cigars in the
stables. He got after me with a hunting-crop just at the moment when I
was beginning to realize that what I wanted most on earth was solitude
and repose, and chased me more than a mile across difficult country.
If there was a flaw, so to speak, in the pure joy of being engaged
to Florence, it was the fact that she rather took after her father,
and one was never certain when she might erupt. She had a wonderful
profile, though.

'Lady Florence and I are engaged, Jeeves,' I said.

'Indeed, sir?'

You know, there was a kind of rummy something about his manner.
Perfectly all right and all that, but not what you'd call chirpy.
It somehow gave me the impression that he wasn't keen on Florence.
Well, of course, it wasn't my business. I supposed that while he had
been valeting old Worplesdon she must have trodden on his toes in
some way. Florence was a dear girl, and, seen sideways, most awfully
good-looking; but if she had a fault it was a tendency to be a bit
imperious with the domestic staff.

At this point in the proceedings there was another ring at the front
door. Jeeves shimmered out and came back with a telegram. I opened it.
It ran:

    Return immediately. Extremely urgent. Catch first train. Florence.

'Rum!' I said.

'Sir?'

'Oh, nothing!'

It shows how little I knew Jeeves in those days that I didn't go a
bit deeper into the matter with him. Nowadays I would never dream of
reading a rummy communication without asking him what he thought of
it. And this one was devilish odd. What I mean is, Florence knew I was
going back to Easeby the day after tomorrow, anyway; so why the hurry
call? Something must have happened, of course; but I couldn't see what
on earth it could be.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'we shall be going down to Easeby this afternoon. Can
you manage it?'

'Certainly, sir.'

'You can get your packing done and all that?'

'Without any difficulty, sir. Which suit will you wear for the journey?'

'This one.'

I had on a rather sprightly young check that morning, to which I was a
good deal attached; I fancied it, in fact, more than a little. It was
perhaps rather sudden till you got used to it, but, nevertheless, an
extremely sound effort, which many lads at the club and elsewhere had
admired unrestrainedly.

'Very good, sir.'

Again there was that kind of rummy something in his manner. It was
the way he said it, don't you know. He didn't like the suit. I pulled
myself together to assert myself. Something seemed to tell me that,
unless I was jolly careful and nipped this lad in the bud, he would
be starting to boss me. He had the aspect of a distinctly resolute
blighter.

Well, I wasn't going to have any of that sort of thing, by Jove!
I'd seen so many cases of fellows who had become perfect slaves to
their valets. I remember poor old Aubrey Fothergill telling me--with
absolute tears in his eyes, poor chap!--one night at the club, that
he had been compelled to give up a favourite pair of brown shoes
simply because Meekyn, his man, disapproved of them. You have to
keep these fellows in their place, don't you know. You have to work
the good old iron-hand-in-the-velvet-glove wheeze. If you give them a
what's-its-name, they take a thingummy.

'Don't you like this suit, Jeeves?' I said coldly.

'Oh, yes, sir.'

'Well, what don't you like about it?'

'It is a very nice suit, sir.'

'Well, what's wrong with it? Out with it, dash it!'

'If I might make the suggestion, sir, a simple brown or blue, with a
hint of some quiet twill--'

'What absolute rot!'

'Very good, sir.'

'Perfectly blithering, my dear man!'

'As you say, sir.'

I felt as if I had stepped on the place where the last stair ought to
have been, but wasn't. I felt defiant, if you know what I mean, and
there didn't seem anything to defy.

'All right, then,' I said.

'Yes, sir.'

And then he went away to collect his kit, while I started in again
on _Types of Ethical Theory_ and took a stab at a chapter headed
'Idiopsychological Ethics'.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most of the way down in the train that afternoon, I was wondering what
could be up at the other end. I simply couldn't see what could have
happened. Easeby wasn't one of those country houses you read about in
the society novels, where young girls are lured on to play baccarat and
then skinned to the bone of their jewellery, and so on. The house-party
I had left had consisted entirely of law-abiding birds like myself.

Besides, my uncle wouldn't have let anything of that kind go on in his
house. He was a rather stiff, precise sort of old boy, who liked a
quiet life. He was just finishing a history of the family or something,
which he had been working on for the last year, and didn't stir much
from the library. He was rather a good instance of what they say about
its being a good scheme for a fellow to sow his wild oats. I'd been
told that in his youth Uncle Willoughby had been a bit of a rounder.
You would never have thought it to look at him now.

When I got to the house, Oakshott, the butler, told me that Florence
was in her room, watching her maid pack. Apparently there was a dance
on at a house about twenty miles away that night, and she was motoring
over with some of the Easeby lot and would be away some nights.
Oakshott said she had told him to tell her the moment I arrived; so I
trickled into the smoking-room and waited, and presently in she came. A
glance showed me that she was perturbed, and even peeved. Her eyes had
a goggly look, and altogether she appeared considerably pipped.

'Darling!' I said, and attempted the good old embrace; but she
side-stepped like a bantam-weight.

'Don't!'

'What's the matter?'

'Everything's the matter! Bertie, you remember asking me, when you
left, to make myself pleasant to your uncle?'

'Yes.'

The idea being, of course, that as at that time I was more or less
dependent on Uncle Willoughby I couldn't very well marry without his
approval. And though I knew he wouldn't have any objection to Florence,
having known her father since they were at Oxford together, I hadn't
wanted to take any chances; so I had told her to make an effort to
fascinate the old boy.

'You told me it would please him particularly if I asked him to read me
some of his history of the family.'

'Wasn't he pleased?'

'He was delighted. He finished writing the thing yesterday afternoon,
and read me nearly all of it last night. I have never had such a shock
in my life. The book is an outrage. It is impossible. It is horrible!'

'But, dash it, the family weren't so bad as all that.'

'It is not a history of the family at all. Your uncle has written his
reminiscences! He calls them "Recollections of a Long Life"!'

I began to understand. As I say, Uncle Willoughby had been somewhat on
the tabasco side as a young man, and it began to look as if he might
have turned out something pretty fruity if he had started recollecting
his long life.

'If half of what he has written is true,' said Florence, 'your uncle's
youth must have been perfectly appalling. The moment we began to read
he plunged straight into a most scandalous story of how he and my
father were thrown out of a music-hall in 1887!'

'Why?'

'I decline to tell you why.'

It must have been something pretty bad. It took a lot to make them
chuck people out of music-halls in 1887.

'Your uncle specifically states that father had drunk a quart and a
half of champagne before beginning the evening,' she went on. 'The
book is full of stories like that. There is a dreadful one about Lord
Emsworth.'

'Lord Emsworth? Not the one we know? Not the one at Blandings?'

A most respectable old Johnnie, don't you know. Doesn't do a thing
nowadays but dig in the garden with a spud.

'The very same. That is what makes the book so unspeakable. It is full
of stories about people one knows who are the essence of propriety
today, but who seem to have behaved, when they were in London in
the eighties, in a manner that would not have been tolerated in
the fo'c'sle of a whaler. Your uncle seems to remember everything
disgraceful that happened to anybody when he was in his early twenties.
There is a story about Sir Stanley Gervase-Gervase at Rosherville
Gardens which is ghastly in its perfection of detail. It seems that
Sir Stanley--but I can't tell you!'

'Have a dash!'

'No!'

'Oh, well, I shouldn't worry. No publisher will print the book if it's
as bad as all that.'

'On the contrary, your uncle told me that all negotiations are settled
with Riggs and Ballinger, and he's sending off the manuscript tomorrow
for immediate publication. They make a special thing of that sort of
book. They published Lady Carnaby's _Memories of Eighty Interesting
Years_.'

'I read 'em!'

'Well, then, when I tell you that Lady Carnaby's Memories are simply
not to be compared with your uncle's Recollections, you will understand
my state of mind. And father appears in nearly every story in the book!
I am horrified at the things he did when he was a young man!'

'What's to be done?'

'The manuscript must be intercepted before it reaches Riggs and
Ballinger, and destroyed!'

I sat up.

This sounded rather sporting.

'How are you going to do it?' I inquired.

'How can I do it? Didn't I tell you the parcel goes off tomorrow? I
am going to the Murgatroyds' dance tonight and shall not be back till
Monday. You must do it. That is why I telegraphed to you.'

'What!'

She gave me a look.

'Do you mean to say you refuse to help me, Bertie?'

'No; but--I say!'

'It's quite simple.'

'But even if I--What I mean is--Of course, anything I can do--but--if
you know what I mean--'

'You say you want to marry me, Bertie?'

'Yes, of course; but still--'

For a moment she looked exactly like her old father.

'I will never marry you if those Recollections are published.'

'But, Florence, old thing!'

'I mean it. You may look on it as a test, Bertie. If you have the
resource and courage to carry this thing through, I will take it as
evidence that you are not the vapid and shiftless person most people
think you. If you fail, I shall know that your Aunt Agatha was right
when she called you a spineless invertebrate and advised me strongly
not to marry you. It will be perfectly simple for you to intercept the
manuscript, Bertie. It only requires a little resolution.'

'But suppose Uncle Willoughby catches me at it? He'd cut me off with a
bob.'

'If you care more for your uncle's money than for me--'

'No, no! Rather not!'

'Very well, then. The parcel containing the manuscript will, of course,
be placed on the hall table tomorrow for Oakshott to take to the
village with the letters. All you have to do is to take it away and
destroy it. Then your uncle will think it has been lost in the post.'

It sounded thin to me.

'Hasn't he got a copy of it?'

'No; it has not been typed. He is sending the manuscript just as he
wrote it.'

'But he could write it over again.'

'As if he would have the energy!'

'But--'

'If you are going to do nothing but make absurd objections, Bertie--'

'I was only pointing things out.'

'Well, don't! Once and for all, will you do me this quite simple act of
kindness?'

The way she put it gave me an idea.

'Why not get Edwin to do it? Keep it in the family, kind of, don't you
know. Besides, it would be a boon to the kid.'

A jolly bright idea it seemed to me. Edwin was her young brother, who
was spending his holidays at Easeby. He was a ferret-faced kid, whom I
had disliked since birth. As a matter of fact, talking of Recollections
and Memories, it was young blighted Edwin who, nine years before, had
led his father to where I was smoking his cigar and caused all the
unpleasantness. He was fourteen now and had just joined the Boy Scouts.
He was one of those thorough kids, and took his responsibilities pretty
seriously. He was always in a sort of fever because he was dropping
behind schedule with his daily acts of kindness. However hard he tried,
he'd fall behind; and then you would find him prowling about the house,
setting such a clip to try and catch up with himself that Easeby was
rapidly becoming a perfect hell for man and beast.

The idea didn't seem to strike Florence.

'I shall do nothing of the kind, Bertie. I wonder you can't appreciate
the compliment I am paying you--trusting you like this.'

'Oh, I see that all right, but what I mean is, Edwin would do it so
much better than I would. These Boy Scouts are up to all sorts of
dodges. They spoor, don't you know, and take cover and creep about, and
what-not.'

'Bertie, will you or will you not do this perfectly trivial thing for
me? If not, say so now, and let us end this farce of pretending that
you care a snap of the fingers for me.'

'Dear old soul, I love you devotedly!'

'Then will you or will you not--'

'Oh, all right,' I said. 'All right! All right! All right!'

And then I tottered forth to think it over. I met Jeeves in the passage
just outside.

'I beg your pardon, sir. I was endeavouring to find you.'

'What's the matter?'

'I felt that I should tell you, sir, that somebody has been putting
black polish on our brown walking shoes.'

'What! Who? Why?'

'I could not say, sir.'

'Can anything be done with them?'

'Nothing, sir.'

'Damn!'

'Very good, sir.'

       *       *       *       *       *

I've often wondered since then how these murderer fellows manage to
keep in shape while they're contemplating their next effort. I had a
much simpler sort of job on hand, and the thought of it rattled me to
such an extent in the night watches that I was a perfect wreck next
day. Dark circles under the eyes--I give you my word! I had to call on
Jeeves to rally round with one of those life-savers of his.

From breakfast on I felt like a bag-snatcher at a railway station. I
had to hang about waiting for the parcel to be put on the hall table,
and it wasn't put. Uncle Willoughby was a fixture in the library,
adding the finishing touches to the great work, I supposed, and the
more I thought the thing over the less I liked it. The chances against
my pulling it off seemed about three to two, and the thought of what
would happen if I didn't gave me cold shivers down the spine. Uncle
Willoughby was a pretty mild sort of old boy, as a rule, but I've known
him to cut up rough, and, by Jove, he was scheduled to extend himself
if he caught me trying to get away with his life work.

It wasn't till nearly four that he toddled out of the library with the
parcel under his arm, put it on the table, and toddled off again.
I was hiding a bit to the south-east at the moment, behind a suit
of armour. I bounded out and legged it for the table. Then I ripped
upstairs to hide the swag. I charged in like a mustang and nearly
stubbed my toe on young blighted Edwin, the Boy Scout. He was standing
at the chest of drawers, confound him, messing about with my ties.

'Hallo!' he said.

'What are you doing here?'

'I'm tidying your room. It's my last Saturday's act of kindness.'

'Last Saturday's.'

'I'm five days behind. I was six till last night, but I polished your
shoes.'

'Was it you--'

'Yes. Did you see them? I just happened to think of it. I was in here,
looking round. Mr Berkeley had this room while you were away. He left
this morning. I thought perhaps he might have left something in it that
I could have sent on. I've often done acts of kindness that way.'

'You must be a comfort to one and all!'

It became more and more apparent to me that this infernal kid must
somehow be turned out eftsoons or right speedily. I had hidden the
parcel behind my back, and I didn't think he had seen it; but I wanted
to get at that chest of drawers quick, before anyone else came along.

'I shouldn't bother about tidying the room,' I said.

'I like tidying it. It's not a bit of trouble--really.'

'But it's quite tidy now.'

'Not so tidy as I shall make it.'

This was getting perfectly rotten. I didn't want to murder the kid, and
yet there didn't seem any other way of shifting him. I pressed down the
mental accelerator. The old lemon throbbed fiercely. I got an idea.

'There's something much kinder than that which you could do,' I said.
'You see that box of cigars? Take it down to the smoking-room and snip
off the ends for me. That would save me no end of trouble. Stagger
along, laddie.'

He seemed a bit doubtful; but he staggered. I shoved the parcel into
a drawer, locked it, trousered the key, and felt better. I might be a
chump, but, dash it, I could out-general a mere kid with a face like a
ferret. I went downstairs again. Just as I was passing the smoking-room
door out curveted Edwin. It seemed to me that if he wanted to do a real
act of kindness he would commit suicide.

'I'm snipping them,' he said.

'Snip on! Snip on!'

'Do you like them snipped much, or only a bit?'

'Medium.'

'All right. I'll be getting on, then.'

'I should.'

And we parted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fellows who know all about that sort of thing--detectives, and so
on--will tell you that the most difficult thing in the world is to get
rid of the body. I remember, as a kid, having to learn by heart a poem
about a bird by the name of Eugene Aram, who had the deuce of a job in
this respect. All I can recall of the actual poetry is the bit that
goes:

    Tum-tum, tum-tum, tum-tumty-tum,
    I slew him, tum-tum tum!

But I recollect that the poor blighter spent much of his valuable time
dumping the corpse into ponds and burying it, and what-not, only to
have it pop out at him again. It was about an hour after I had shoved
the parcel into the drawer when I realized that I had let myself in for
just the same sort of thing.

Florence had talked in an airy sort of way about destroying the
manuscript; but when one came down to it, how the deuce can a chap
destroy a great chunky mass of paper in somebody else's house in the
middle of summer? I couldn't ask to have a fire in my bedroom, with the
thermometer in the eighties. And if I didn't burn the thing, how else
could I get rid of it? Fellows on the battlefield eat dispatches to
keep them from falling into the hands of the enemy, but it would have
taken me a year to eat Uncle Willoughby's Recollections.

I'm bound to say the problem absolutely baffled me. The only thing
seemed to be to leave the parcel in the drawer and hope for the best.

I don't know whether you have ever experienced it, but it's a dashed
unpleasant thing having a crime on one's conscience. Towards the end
of the day the mere sight of the drawer began to depress me. I found
myself getting all on edge; and once when Uncle Willoughby trickled
silently into the smoking-room when I was alone there and spoke to me
before I knew he was there, I broke the record for the sitting high
jump.

I was wondering all the time when Uncle Willoughby would sit up and
take notice. I didn't think he would have time to suspect that anything
had gone wrong till Saturday morning, when he would be expecting,
of course, to get the acknowledgement of the manuscript from the
publishers. But early on Friday evening he came out of the library as
I was passing and asked me to step in. He was looking considerably
rattled.

'Bertie,' he said--he always spoke in a precise sort of pompous kind
of way--'an exceedingly disturbing thing has happened. As you know, I
dispatched the manuscript of my book to Messrs Riggs and Ballinger, the
publishers, yesterday afternoon. It should have reached them by the
first post this morning. Why I should have been uneasy I cannot say,
but my mind was not altogether at rest respecting the safety of the
parcel. I therefore telephoned to Messrs Riggs and Ballinger a few
moments back to make inquiries. To my consternation they informed me
that they were not yet in receipt of my manuscript.'

'Very rum!'

'I recollect distinctly placing it myself on the hall table in good
time to be taken to the village. But here is a sinister thing. I have
spoken to Oakshott, who took the rest of the letters to the post
office, and he cannot recall seeing it there. He is, indeed, unswerving
in his assertions that when he went to the hall to collect the letters
there was no parcel among them.'

'Sounds funny!'

'Bertie, shall I tell you what I suspect?'

'What's that?'

'The suspicion will no doubt sound to you incredible, but it alone
seems to fit the facts as we know them. I incline to the belief that
the parcel has been stolen.'

'Oh, I say! Surely not!'

'Wait! Hear me out. Though I have said nothing to you before, or to
anyone else, concerning the matter, the fact remains that during the
past few weeks a number of objects--some valuable, others not--have
disappeared in this house. The conclusion to which one is irresistibly
impelled is that we have a kleptomaniac in our midst. It is a
peculiarity of kleptomania, as you are no doubt aware, that the subject
is unable to differentiate between the intrinsic values of objects. He
will purloin an old coat as readily as a diamond ring, or a tobacco
pipe costing but a few shillings with the same eagerness as a purse of
gold. The fact that this manuscript of mine could be of no possible
value to any outside person convinces me that--'

'But, uncle, one moment; I know all about those things that were
stolen. It was Meadowes, my man, who pinched them. I caught him
snaffling my silk socks. Right in the act, by Jove!'

He was tremendously impressed.

'You amaze me, Bertie! Send for the man at once and question him.'

'But he isn't here. You see, directly I found that he was a
sock-sneaker I gave him the boot. That's why I went to London--to get a
new man.'

'Then, if the man Meadowes is no longer in the house it could not be he
who purloined my manuscript. The whole thing is inexplicable.'

After which we brooded for a bit. Uncle Willoughby pottered about the
room, registering baffledness, while I sat sucking at a cigarette,
feeling rather like a chappie I'd once read about in a book, who
murdered another cove and hid the body under the dining-room table, and
then had to be the life and soul of a dinner party, with it there all
the time. My guilty secret oppressed me to such an extent that after
a while I couldn't stick it any longer. I lit another cigarette and
started for a stroll in the grounds, by way of cooling off.

It was one of those still evenings you get in the summer, when you can
hear a snail clear its throat a mile away. The sun was sinking over
the hills and the gnats were fooling about all over the place, and
everything smelled rather topping--what with the falling dew and so
on--and I was just beginning to feel a little soothed by the peace of
it all when suddenly I heard my name spoken.

'It's about Bertie.'

It was the loathsome voice of young blighted Edwin! For a moment I
couldn't locate it. Then I realized that it came from the library. My
stroll had taken me within a few yards of the open window.

I had often wondered how those Johnnies in books did it--I mean the
fellows with whom it was the work of a moment to do about a dozen
things that ought to have taken them about ten minutes. But, as a
matter of fact, it was the work of a moment with me to chuck away my
cigarette, swear a bit, leap about ten yards, dive into a bush that
stood near the library window, and stand there with my ears flapping. I
was as certain as I've ever been of anything that all sorts of rotten
things were in the offing.

'About Bertie?' I heard Uncle Willoughby say.

'About Bertie and your parcel. I heard you talking to him just now. I
believe he's got it.'

When I tell you that just as I heard these frightful words a fairly
substantial beetle of sorts dropped from the bush down the back of my
neck, and I couldn't even stir to squash the same, you will understand
that I felt pretty rotten. Everything seemed against me.

'What do you mean, boy? I was discussing the disappearance of my
manuscript with Bertie only a moment back, and he professed himself as
perplexed by the mystery as myself.'

'Well, I was in his room yesterday afternoon, doing him an act of
kindness, and he came in with a parcel. I could see it, though he
tried to keep it behind his back. And then he asked me to go to the
smoking-room and snip some cigars for him; and about two minutes
afterwards he came down--and he wasn't carrying anything. So it must be
in his room.'

I understand they deliberately teach these dashed Boy Scouts to
cultivate their powers of observation and deduction and what-not.
Devilish thoughtless and inconsiderate of them, I call it. Look at the
trouble it causes.

'It sounds incredible,' said Uncle Willoughby, thereby bucking me up a
trifle.

'Shall I go and look in his room?' asked young blighted Edwin. 'I'm
sure the parcel's there.'

'But what could be his motive for perpetrating this extraordinary
theft?'

'Perhaps he's a--what you said just now.'

'A kleptomaniac? Impossible!'

'It might have been Bertie who took all those things from the very
start,' suggested the little brute hopefully. 'He may be like Raffles.'

'Raffles?'

'He's a chap in a book who went about pinching things.'

'I cannot believe that Bertie would--ah--go about pinching things.'

'Well, I'm sure he's got the parcel. I'll tell you what you might do.
You might say that Mr Berkeley wired that he had left something here.
He had Bertie's room, you know. You might say you wanted to look for
it.'

'That would be possible. I--'

I didn't wait to hear any more. Things were getting too hot. I sneaked
softly out of my bush and raced for the front door. I sprinted up to
my room and made for the drawer where I had put the parcel. And then
I found I hadn't the key. It wasn't for the deuce of a time that I
recollected I had shifted it to my evening trousers the night before
and must have forgotten to take it out again.

Where the dickens were my evening things? I had looked all over the
place before I remembered that Jeeves must have taken them away to
brush. To leap at the bell and ring it was, with me, the work of a
moment. I had just rung it when there was a footstep outside, and in
came Uncle Willoughby.

'Oh, Bertie,' he said, without a blush, 'I have--ah--received a
telegram from Berkeley, who occupied this room in your absence, asking
me to forward him his--er--his cigarette-case, which, it would appear,
he inadvertently omitted to take with him when he left the house. I
cannot find it downstairs; and it has, therefore, occurred to me that
he may have left it in this room. I will--er--just take a look round.'

It was one of the most disgusting spectacles I've ever seen--this
white-haired old man, who should have been thinking of the hereafter,
standing there lying like an actor.

'I haven't seen it anywhere,' I said.

'Nevertheless, I will search. I must--ah--spare no effort.'

'I should have seen it if it had been here--what?'

'It may have escaped your notice. It is--er--possibly in one of the
drawers.'

He began to nose about. He pulled out drawer after drawer, pottering
round like an old bloodhound, and babbling from time to time about
Berkeley and his cigarette-case in a way that struck me as perfectly
ghastly. I just stood there, losing weight every moment.

Then he came to the drawer where the parcel was.

'This appears to be locked,' he said, rattling the handle.

'Yes; I shouldn't bother about that one. It--it's--er--locked, and all
that sort of thing.'

'You have not the key?'

A soft, respectful voice spoke behind me.

'I fancy, sir, that this must be the key you require. It was in the
pocket of your evening trousers.'

It was Jeeves. He had shimmered in, carrying my evening things, and was
standing there holding out the key. I could have massacred the man.

'Thank you,' said my uncle.

'Not at all, sir.'

The next moment Uncle Willoughby had opened the drawer. I shut my eyes.

'No,' said Uncle Willoughby, 'there is nothing here. The drawer
is empty. Thank you, Bertie. I hope I have not disturbed you. I
fancy--er--Berkeley must have taken his case with him after all.'

When he had gone I shut the door carefully. Then I turned to Jeeves.
The man was putting my evening things out on a chair.

'Er--Jeeves!'

'Sir?'

'Oh, nothing.'

It was deuced difficult to know how to begin.

'Er--Jeeves!'

'Sir?'

'Did you--Was there--Have you by chance--'

'I removed the parcel this morning, sir.'

'Oh--ah--why?'

'I considered it more prudent, sir.'

I mused for a while.

'Of course, I suppose all this seems tolerably rummy to you, Jeeves?'

'Not at all, sir. I chanced to overhear you and Lady Florence speaking
of the matter the other evening, sir.'

'Did you, by Jove?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Well--er--Jeeves, I think that, on the whole, if you were to--as it
were--freeze on to that parcel until we get back to London--'

'Exactly, sir.'

'And then we might--er--so to speak--chuck it away somewhere--what?'

'Precisely, sir.'

'I'll leave it in your hands.'

'Entirely, sir.'

'You know, Jeeves, you're by way of being rather a topper.'

'I endeavour to give satisfaction, sir.'

'One in a million, by Jove!'

'It is very kind of you to say so, sir.'

'Well, that's about all, then, I think.'

'Very good, sir.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Florence came back on Monday. I didn't see her till we were all having
tea in the hall. It wasn't till the crowd had cleared away a bit that
we got a chance of having a word together.

'Well, Bertie?' she said.

'It's all right.'

'You have destroyed the manuscript?'

'Not exactly; but--'

'What do you mean?'

'I mean I haven't absolutely--'

'Bertie, your manner is furtive!'

'It's all right. It's this way--'

And I was just going to explain how things stood when out of the
library came leaping Uncle Willoughby, looking as braced as a
two-year-old. The old boy was a changed man.

'A most remarkable thing, Bertie! I have just been speaking with Mr
Riggs on the telephone, and he tells me he received my manuscript by
the first post this morning. I cannot imagine what can have caused the
delay. Our postal facilities are extremely inadequate in the rural
districts. I shall write to headquarters about it. It is insufferable
if valuable parcels are to be delayed in this fashion.'

I happened to be looking at Florence's profile at the moment, and
at this juncture she swung round and gave me a look that went right
through me like a knife. Uncle Willoughby meandered back to the
library, and there was a silence that you could have dug bits out of
with a spoon.

'I can't understand it,' I said at last. 'I can't understand it, by
Jove!'

'I can. I can understand it perfectly, Bertie. Your heart failed you.
Rather than risk offending your uncle you--'

'No, no! Absolutely!'

'You preferred to lose me rather than risk losing the money. Perhaps
you did not think I meant what I said. I meant every word. Our
engagement is ended.'

'But--I say!'

'Not another word!'

'But, Florence, old thing!'

'I do not wish to hear any more. I see now that your Aunt Agatha was
perfectly right. I consider that I have had a very lucky escape. There
was a time when I thought that, with patience, you might be moulded
into something worth while. I see now that you are impossible!'

And she popped off, leaving me to pick up the pieces. When I had
collected the debris to some extent I went to my room and rang for
Jeeves. He came in looking as if nothing had happened or was ever going
to happen. He was the calmest thing in captivity.

'Jeeves!' I yelled. 'Jeeves, that parcel has arrived in London!'

'Yes, sir?'

'Did you send it?'

'Yes, sir. I acted for the best, sir. I think that both you and Lady
Florence overestimated the danger of people being offended at being
mentioned in Sir Willoughby's Recollections. It has been my experience,
sir, that the normal person enjoys seeing his or her name in print,
irrespective of what is said about them. I have an aunt, sir, who a
few years ago was a martyr to swollen limbs. She tried Walkinshaw's
Supreme Ointment and obtained considerable relief--so much so that
she sent them an unsolicited testimonial. Her pride at seeing her
photograph in the daily papers in connexion with descriptions of her
lower limbs before taking, which were nothing less than revolting, was
so intense that it led me to believe that publicity, of whatever sort,
is what nearly everybody desires. Moreover, if you have ever studied
psychology, sir, you will know that respectable old gentlemen are by no
means averse to having it advertised that they were extremely wild in
their youth. I have an uncle--'

I cursed his aunts and his uncles and him and all the rest of the
family.

'Do you know that Lady Florence has broken off her engagement with me?'

'Indeed, sir?'

Not a bit of sympathy! I might have been telling him it was a fine day.

'You're sacked!'

'Very good, sir.'

He coughed gently.

'As I am no longer in your employment, sir, I can speak freely without
appearing to take a liberty. In my opinion you and Lady Florence were
quite unsuitably matched. Her ladyship is of a highly determined
and arbitrary temperament, quite opposed to your own. I was in Lord
Worplesdon's service for nearly a year, during which time I had
ample opportunities of studying her ladyship. The opinion of the
servants' hall was far from favourable to her. Her ladyship's temper
caused a good deal of adverse comment among us. It was at times quite
impossible. You would not have been happy, sir!'

'Get out!'

'I think you would also have found her educational methods a little
trying, sir. I have glanced at the book her ladyship gave you--it has
been lying on your table since our arrival--and it is, in my opinion,
quite unsuitable. You would not have enjoyed it. And I have it from her
ladyship's own maid, who happened to overhear a conversation between
her ladyship and one of the gentlemen staying here--Mr Maxwell, who is
employed in an editorial capacity by one of the reviews--that it was
her intention to start you almost immediately upon Nietzsche. You would
not enjoy Nietzsche, sir. He is fundamentally unsound.'

'Get out!'

'Very good, sir.'

       *       *       *       *       *

It's rummy how sleeping on a thing often makes you feel quite different
about it. It's happened to me over and over again. Somehow or other,
when I woke next morning the old heart didn't feel half so broken as
it had done. It was a perfectly topping day, and there was something
about the way the sun came in at the window and the row the birds were
kicking up in the ivy that made me half wonder whether Jeeves wasn't
right. After all, though she had a wonderful profile, was it such a
catch being engaged to Florence Craye as the casual observer might
imagine? Wasn't there something in what Jeeves had said about her
character? I began to realize that my ideal wife was something quite
different, something a lot more clinging and drooping and prattling,
and what-not.

I had got as far as this in thinking the thing out when that _Types of
Ethical Theory_ caught my eye. I opened it, and I give you my honest
word this was what hit me:

    Of the two antithetic terms in the Greek philosophy one only was
    real and self-subsisting; and that one was Ideal Thought as opposed
    to that which it has to penetrate and mould. The other,
    corresponding to our Nature, was in itself phenomenal, unreal,
    without any permanent footing, having no predicates that held true
    for two moments together; in short, redeemed from negation only by
    including indwelling realities appearing through.

Well--I mean to say--what? And Nietzsche, from all accounts, a lot
worse than that!

'Jeeves,' I said, when he came in with my morning tea, 'I've been
thinking it over. You're engaged again.'

'Thank you, sir.'

I sucked down a cheerful mouthful. A great respect for this bloke's
judgement began to soak through me.

'Oh, Jeeves,' I said; 'about that check suit.'

'Yes, sir?'

'Is it really a frost?'

'A trifle too bizarre, sir, in my opinion.'

'But lots of fellows have asked me who my tailor is.'

'Doubtless in order to avoid him, sir.'

'He's supposed to be one of the best men in London.'

'I am saying nothing against his moral character, sir.'

I hesitated a bit. I had a feeling that I was passing into this
chappie's clutches, and that if I gave in now I should become just like
poor old Aubrey Fothergill, unable to call my soul my own. On the other
hand, this was obviously a cove of rare intelligence, and it would be a
comfort in a lot of ways to have him doing the thinking for me. I made
up my mind.

'All right, Jeeves,' I said. 'You know! Give the bally thing away to
somebody!'

He looked down at me like a father gazing tenderly at the wayward child.

'Thank you, sir. I gave it to the under-gardener last night. A little
more tea, sir?'




                    2--The Artistic Career of Corky


You will notice, as you flit through these reminiscences of mine, that
from time to time the scene of action is laid in and around the city of
New York; and it is just possible that this may occasion the puzzled
look and the start of surprise. 'What,' it is possible that you may ask
yourselves, 'is Bertram doing so far from his beloved native land?'

Well, it's a fairly longish story; but, reefing it down a bit and
turning it for the nonce into a two-reeler, what happened was that my
Aunt Agatha on one occasion sent me over to America to try to stop
young Gussie, my cousin, marrying a girl on the vaudeville stage, and
I got the whole thing so mixed up that I decided it would be a sound
scheme to stop on in New York for a bit instead of going back and
having long, cosy chats with her about the affair.

So I sent Jeeves out to find a decent flat, and settled down for a
spell of exile.

I'm bound to say New York's a most sprightly place to be exiled in.
Everybody was awfully good to me, and there seemed to be plenty of
things going on so, take it for all in all, I didn't undergo any
frightful hardships. Blokes introduced me to other blokes, and so on
and so forth, and it wasn't long before I knew squads of the right
sort, some who rolled in the stuff in houses up by the Park, and
others who lived with the gas turned down mostly around Washington
Square--artists and writers and so forth. Brainy coves.

Corky, the bird I am about to treat of, was one of the artists.
A portrait-painter, he called himself, but as a matter of fact
his score up to date had been nil. You see, the catch about
portrait-painting--I've looked into the thing a bit--is that you
can't start painting portraits till people come along and ask you to,
and they won't come and ask you to until you've painted a lot first.
This makes it kind of difficult, not to say tough, for the ambitious
youngster.

Corky managed to get along by drawing an occasional picture for the
comic papers--he had rather a gift for funny stuff when he got a good
idea--and doing bedsteads and chairs and things for the advertisements.
His principal source of income, however, was derived from biting
the ear of a rich uncle--one Alexander Worple, who was in the jute
business. I'm a bit foggy as to what jute is, but it's apparently
something the populace is pretty keen on, for Mr Worple had made quite
an indecently large stack out of it.

Now, a great many fellows think that having a rich uncle is a pretty
soft snap; but, according to Corky, such is not the case. Corky's uncle
was a robust sort of cove, who looked like living for ever. He was
fifty-one, and it seemed as if he might go to par. It was not this,
however, that distressed poor Corky, for he was not bigoted and had no
objection to the man going on living. What Corky kicked at was the way
the above Worple used to harry him.

Corky's uncle, you see, didn't want him to be an artist. He didn't
think he had any talent in that direction. He was always urging him
to chuck Art and go into the jute business and start at the bottom
and work his way up. And what Corky said was that, while he didn't
know what they did at the bottom of a jute business, instinct told him
that it was something too beastly for words. Corky, moreover, believed
in his future as an artist. Some day, he said, he was going to make
a hit. Meanwhile, by using the utmost tact and persuasiveness, he
was inducing his uncle to cough up very grudgingly a small quarterly
allowance.

He wouldn't have got this if his uncle hadn't had a hobby. Mr Worple
was peculiar in this respect. As a rule, from what I've observed, the
American captain of industry doesn't do anything out of business hours.
When he has put the cat out and locked up the office for the night,
he just relapses into a state of coma from which he emerges only to
start being a captain of industry again. But Mr Worple in his spare
time was what is known as an ornithologist. He had written a book
called _American Birds_, and was writing another, to be called _More
American Birds_. When he had finished that, the presumption was that
he would begin a third, and keep on till the supply of American birds
gave out. Corky used to go to him about once every three months and let
him talk about American birds. Apparently you could do what you liked
with old Worple if you gave him his head first on his pet subject, so
these little chats used to make Corky's allowance all right for the
time being. But it was pretty rotten for the poor chap. There was the
frightful suspense, you see, and, apart from that, birds, except when
broiled and in the society of a cold bottle, bored him stiff.

To complete the character-study of Mr Worple, he was a man of extremely
uncertain temper, and his general tendency was to think that Corky was
a poor chump and that whatever step he took in any direction on his own
account was just another proof of his innate idiocy. I should imagine
Jeeves feels very much the same about me.

So when Corky trickled into my apartment one afternoon, shooing a girl
in front of him, and said, 'Bertie, I want you to meet my fiancée, Miss
Singer,' the aspect of the matter which hit me first was precisely the
one which he had come to consult me about. The very first words I
spoke were, 'Corky, how about your uncle?'

The poor chap gave one of those mirthless laughs. He was looking
anxious and worried, like a man who has done the murder all right but
can't think what the deuce to do with the body.

'We're so scared, Mr Wooster,' said the girl. 'We were hoping that you
might suggest a way of breaking it to him.'

Muriel Singer was one of those very quiet, appealing girls who have a
way of looking at you with their big eyes as if they thought you were
the greatest thing on earth and wondered that you hadn't got on to it
yet yourself. She sat there in a sort of shrinking way, looking at me
as if she were saying to herself, 'Oh, I do hope this great strong
man isn't going to hurt me.' She gave a fellow a protective kind of
feeling, made him want to stroke her hand and say, 'There, there,
little one!' or words to that effect. She made me feel that there
was nothing I wouldn't do for her. She was rather like one of those
innocent-tasting American drinks which creep imperceptibly into your
system so that, before you know what you're doing, you're starting out
to reform the world by force if necessary and pausing on your way to
tell the large man in the corner that, if he looks at you like that,
you will knock his head off. What I mean is, she made me feel alert and
dashing, like a knight-errant or something of that kind. I felt that I
was with her in this thing to the limit.

'I don't see why your uncle shouldn't be most awfully bucked,' I said
to Corky. 'He will think Miss Singer the ideal wife for you.'

Corky declined to cheer up.

'You don't know him. Even if he did like Muriel, he wouldn't admit
it. That's the sort of pig-headed ass he is. It would be a matter of
principle with him to kick. All he would consider would be that I had
gone and taken an important step without asking his advice, and he
would raise Cain automatically. He's always done it.'

I strained the old bean to meet this emergency.

'You want to work it so that he makes Miss Singer's acquaintance
without knowing that you know her. Then you come along--'

'But how can I work it that way?'

I saw his point. That was the catch.

'There's only one thing to do,' I said.

'What's that?'

'Leave it to Jeeves.'

And I rang the bell.

'Sir?' said Jeeves, kind of manifesting himself. One of the rummy
things about Jeeves is that, unless you watch like a hawk, you very
seldom see him come into a room. He's like one of those weird birds in
India who dissolve themselves into thin air and nip through space in a
sort of disembodied way and assemble the parts again just where they
want them. I've got a cousin who's what they call a Theosophist, and
he says he's often nearly worked the thing himself, but couldn't quite
bring it off, probably owing to having fed in his boyhood on the flesh
of animals slain in anger and pie.

The moment I saw the man standing there, registering respectful
attention, a weight seemed to roll off my mind. I felt like a lost
child who spots his father in the offing.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'we want your advice.'

'Very good, sir.'

I boiled down Corky's painful case into a few well-chosen words.

'So you see what it amounts to, Jeeves. We want you to suggest some way
by which Mr Worple can make Miss Singer's acquaintance without getting
on to the fact that Mr Corcoran already knows her. Understand?'

'Perfectly, sir.'

'Well, try to think of something.'

'I have thought of something already, sir.'

'You have!'

'The scheme I would suggest cannot fail of success, but it has what may
seem to you a drawback, sir, in that it requires a certain financial
outlay.'

'He means,' I translated to Corky, 'that he has got a pippin of an
idea, but it's going to cost a bit.'

Naturally the poor chap's face dropped, for this seemed to dish the
whole thing. But I was still under the influence of the girl's melting
gaze, and I saw that this was where I started in as the knight-errant.

'You can count on me for all that sort of thing, Corky,' I said. 'Only
too glad. Carry on, Jeeves.'

'I would suggest, sir, that Mr Corcoran take advantage of Mr Worple's
attachment to ornithology.'

'How on earth did you know that he was fond of birds?'

'It is the way these New York apartments are constructed, sir. Quite
unlike our London houses. The partitions between the rooms are of the
flimsiest nature. With no wish to overhear, I have sometimes heard Mr
Corcoran expressing himself with a generous strength on the subject I
have mentioned.'

'Oh! Well?'

'Why should not the young lady write a small volume, to be
entitled--let us say--_The Children's Book of American Birds_ and
dedicate it to Mr Worple? A limited edition could be published at
your expense, sir, and a great deal of the book would, of course, be
given over to eulogistic remarks concerning Mr Worple's own larger
treatise on the same subject. I should recommend the dispatching of a
presentation copy to Mr Worple, immediately on publication, accompanied
by a letter in which the young lady asks to be allowed to make the
acquaintance of one to whom she owes so much. This would, I fancy,
produce the desired result, but as I say, the expense involved would be
considerable.'

I felt like the proprietor of a performing dog on the vaudeville stage
when the tyke has just pulled off his trick without a hitch. I had
betted on Jeeves all along, and I had known that he wouldn't let me
down. It beats me sometimes why a man with his genius is satisfied to
hang around pressing my clothes and what-not. If I had half Jeeves's
brain I should have a stab at being Prime Minister or something.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'that is absolutely ripping! One of your very best
efforts.'

'Thank you, sir.'

The girl made an objection.

'But I'm sure I couldn't write a book about anything. I can't even
write good letters.'

'Muriel's talents,' said Corky, with a little cough, 'lie more in the
direction of the drama, Bertie. I didn't mention it before, but one of
our reasons for being a trifle nervous as to how Uncle Alexander will
receive the news is that Muriel is in the chorus of that show _Choose
your Exit_ at the Manhattan. It's absurdly unreasonable, but we both
feel that that fact might increase Uncle Alexander's natural tendency
to kick like a steer.'

I saw what he meant. I don't know why it is--one of these psychology
sharps could explain it, I suppose--but uncles and aunts, as a class,
are always dead against the drama, legitimate or otherwise. They don't
seem able to stick it at any price.

But Jeeves had a solution, of course.

'I fancy it would be a simple matter, sir, to find some impecunious
author who would be glad to do the actual composition of the volume for
a small fee. It is only necessary that the young lady's name should
appear on the title page.'

'That's true,' said Corky. 'Sam Patterson would do it for a hundred
dollars. He writes a novelette, three short stories, and ten thousand
words of a serial for one of the all-fiction magazines under different
names every month. A little thing like this would be nothing to him.
I'll get after him right away.'

'Fine!'

'Will that be all, sir?' said Jeeves. 'Very good, sir. Thank you, sir.'

       *       *       *       *       *

I always used to think that publishers had to be devilish intelligent
fellows, loaded down with the grey matter; but I've got their number
now. All a publisher has to do is to write cheques at intervals, while
a lot of deserving and industrious chappies rally round and do the real
work. I know, because I've been one myself. I simply sat tight in the
old flat with a fountain-pen, and in due season a topping, shiny book
came along.

I happened to be down at Corky's place when the first copies of _The
Children's Book of American Birds_ bobbed up. Muriel Singer was there,
and we were talking of things in general when there was a bang at the
door and the parcel was delivered.

It was certainly some book. It had a red cover with a fowl of some
species on it, and underneath the girl's name in gold letters. I opened
a copy at random.

'Often of a spring morning,' it said at the top of page twenty-one,
'as you wander through the fields, you will hear the sweet-toned,
carelessly flowing warble of the purple finch linnet. When you are
older you must read all about him in Mr Alexander Worple's wonderful
book, _American Birds_.'

You see. A boost for the uncle right away. And only a few pages later
there he was in the limelight again in connexion with the yellow-billed
cuckoo. It was great stuff. The more I read, the more I admired the
chap who had written it and Jeeves's genius in putting us on to the
wheeze. I didn't see how the uncle could fail to drop. You can't call a
chap the world's greatest authority on the yellow-billed cuckoo without
rousing a certain disposition towards chumminess in him.

'It's a cert!' I said.

'An absolute cinch!' said Corky.

And a day or two later he meandered up the Avenue to my flat to tell me
that all was well. The uncle had written Muriel a letter so dripping
with the milk of human kindness that if he hadn't known Mr Worple's
handwriting Corky would have refused to believe him the author of it.
Any time it suited Miss Singer to call, said the uncle, he would be
delighted to make her acquaintance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after this I had to go out of town. Divers sound sportsmen
had invited me to pay visits to their country places, and it wasn't
for several months that I settled down in the city again. I had been
wondering a lot, of course, about Corky, whether it all turned out
right, and so forth, and my first evening in New York, happening to
pop into a quiet sort of little restaurant which I go to when I don't
feel inclined for the bright lights, I found Muriel Singer there,
sitting by herself at a table near the door. Corky, I took it, was out
telephoning. I went up and passed the time of day.

'Well, well, well, what?' I said.

'Why, Mr Wooster! How do you do?'

'Corky around?'

'I beg your pardon?'

'You're waiting for Corky, aren't you?'

'Oh, I didn't understand. No, I'm not waiting for him.'

It seemed to me that there was a sort of something in her voice, a kind
of thingummy, you know.

'I say, you haven't had a row with Corky, have you?'

'A row?'

'A spat, don't you know--little misunderstanding--faults on both
sides--er--and all that sort of thing.'

'Why, whatever makes you think that?'

'Oh, well, as it were, what? What I mean is--I thought you usually
dined with him before you went to the theatre.'

'I've left the stage now.'

Suddenly the whole thing dawned on me. I had forgotten what a long time
I had been away.

'Why, of course, I see now! You're married!'

'Yes.'

'How perfectly topping! I wish you all kinds of happiness.'

'Thank you so much. Oh, Alexander,' she said, looking past me, 'this is
a friend of mine--Mr Wooster.'

I spun round. A bloke with a lot of stiff grey hair and a red sort
of healthy face was standing there. Rather a formidable Johnnie, he
looked, though peaceful at the moment.

'I want you to meet my husband, Mr Wooster. Mr Wooster is a friend of
Bruce's, Alexander.'

The old boy grasped my hand warmly, and that was all that kept me from
hitting the floor in a heap. The place was rocking. Absolutely.

'So you know my nephew, Mr Wooster?' I heard him say. 'I wish you would
try to knock a little sense into him and make him quit this playing at
painting. But I have an idea that he is steadying down. I noticed it
first that night he came to dinner with us, my dear, to be introduced
to you. He seemed altogether quieter and more serious. Something seemed
to have sobered him. Perhaps you will give us the pleasure of your
company at dinner tonight, Mr Wooster? Or have you dined?'

I said I had. What I needed then was air, not dinner. I felt that I
wanted to get into the open and think this thing out.

When I reached my flat I heard Jeeves moving about in his lair. I
called him.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'now is the time for all good men to come to the aid
of the party. A stiff b-and-s first of all, and then I've a bit of news
for you.'

He came back with a tray and a long glass.

'Better have one yourself, Jeeves. You'll need it.'

'Later on, perhaps, thank you, sir.'

'All right. Please yourself. But you're going to get a shock. You
remember my friend, Mr Corcoran?'

'Yes, sir.'

'And the girl who was to slide gracefully into his uncle's esteem by
writing the book on birds?'

'Perfectly, sir.'

'Well, she's slid. She's married the uncle.'

He took it without blinking. You can't rattle Jeeves.

'That was always a development to be feared, sir.'

'You don't mean to tell me that you were expecting it?'

'It crossed my mind as a possibility.'

'Did it, by Jove! Well, I think you might have warned us!'

'I hardly liked to take the liberty, sir.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course, as I saw after I had had a bite to eat and was in a calmer
frame of mind, what had happened wasn't my fault, if you came down to
it. I couldn't be expected to foresee that the scheme, in itself a
cracker-jack, would skid into the ditch as it had done; but all the
same I'm bound to admit that I didn't relish the idea of meeting Corky
again until time, the great healer, had been able to get in a bit of
soothing work. I cut Washington Square out absolutely for the next few
months. I gave it the complete miss-in-baulk. And then, just when I
was beginning to think I might safely pop down in that direction and
gather up the dropped threads, so to speak, time, instead of working
the healing wheeze, went and pulled the most awful bone and put the lid
on it. Opening the paper one morning, I read that Mrs Alexander Worple
had presented her husband with a son and heir.

I was so dashed sorry for poor old Corky that I hadn't the heart to
touch my breakfast. I was bowled over. Absolutely. It was the limit.

I hardly knew what to do. I wanted, of course, to rush down to
Washington Square and grip the poor blighter silently by the hand; and
then, thinking it over, I hadn't the nerve. Absent treatment seemed the
touch. I gave it him in waves.

But after a month or so I began to hesitate again. It struck me that
it was playing it a bit low-down on the poor chap, avoiding him like
this just when he probably wanted his pals to surge round him most.
I pictured him sitting in his lonely studio with no company but his
bitter thoughts, and the pathos of it got me to such an extent that I
bounded straight into a taxi and told the driver to go all out for the
studio.

I rushed in, and there was Corky, hunched up at the easel, painting
away, while on the model throne sat a severe-looking female of middle
age, holding a baby.

A fellow has to be ready for that sort of thing.

'Oh, ah!' I said, and started to back out.

Corky looked over his shoulder.

'Hallo, Bertie. Don't go. We're just finishing for the day. That will
be all this afternoon,' he said to the nurse, who got up with the baby
and decanted it into a perambulator which was standing in the fairway.

'At the same hour tomorrow, Mr Corcoran?'

'Yes, please.'

'Good afternoon.'

'Good afternoon.'

Corky stood there, looking at the door, and then he turned to me and
began to get it off his chest. Fortunately, he seemed to take it for
granted that I knew all about what had happened, so it wasn't as
awkward as it might have been.

'It's my uncle's idea,' he said. 'Muriel doesn't know about it yet. The
portrait's to be a surprise for her on her birthday. The nurse takes
the kid out ostensibly to get a breather, and they beat it down here.
If you want an instance of the irony of fate, Bertie, get acquainted
with this. Here's the first commission I have ever had to paint a
portrait, and the sitter is that human poached egg that has butted
in and bounced me out of my inheritance. Can you beat it! I call it
rubbing the thing in to expect me to spend my afternoons gazing into
the ugly face of a little brat who to all intents and purposes has hit
me behind the ear with a black-jack and swiped all I possess. I can't
refuse to paint the portrait, because if I did my uncle would stop my
allowance; yet every time I look up and catch that kid's vacant eye,
I suffer agonies. I tell you, Bertie, sometimes when he gives me a
patronizing glance and then turns away and is sick, as if it revolted
him to look at me, I come within an ace of occupying the entire front
page of the evening papers as the latest murder sensation. There are
moments when I can almost see the headlines: "Promising Young Artist
Beans Baby With Axe."'

I patted his shoulder silently. My sympathy for the poor old scout was
too deep for words.

I kept away from the studio for some time after that, because it didn't
seem right to me to intrude on the poor chappie's sorrow. Besides, I'm
bound to say that nurse intimidated me. She reminded me so infernally
of Aunt Agatha. She was the same gimlet-eyed type.

But one afternoon Corky called me on the phone.

'Bertie!'

'Hallo?'

'Are you doing anything this afternoon?'

'Nothing special.'

'You couldn't come down here, could you?'

'What's the trouble? Anything up?'

'I've finished the portrait.'

'Good boy! Stout work!'

'Yes.' His voice sounded rather doubtful. 'The fact is, Bertie, it
doesn't look quite right to me. There's something about it--My uncle's
coming in half an hour to inspect it, and--I don't know why it is, but
I kind of feel I'd like your moral support!'

I began to see that I was letting myself in for something. The
sympathetic cooperation of Jeeves seemed to me to be indicated.

'You think he'll cut up rough?'

'He may.'

I threw my mind back to the red-faced chappie I had met at the
restaurant, and tried to picture him cutting up rough. It was only too
easy. I spoke to Corky firmly on the telephone.

'I'll come,' I said.

'Good!'

'But only if I may bring Jeeves.'

'Why Jeeves? What's Jeeves got to do with it? Who wants Jeeves? Jeeves
is the fool who suggested the scheme that has led--'

'Listen, Corky, old top! If you think I am going to face that uncle of
yours without Jeeves's support, you're mistaken. I'd sooner go into a
den of wild beasts and bite a lion on the back of the neck.'

'Oh, all right,' said Corky. Not cordially, but he said it; so I rang
for Jeeves, and explained the situation.

'Very good, sir,' said Jeeves.

       *       *       *       *       *

We found Corky near the door, looking at the picture with one hand up
in a defensive sort of way, as if he thought it might swing on him.

'Stand right where you are, Bertie,' he said, without moving. 'Now,
tell me honestly, how does it strike you?'

The light from the big window fell right on the picture. I took a good
look at it. Then I shifted a bit nearer and took another look. Then I
went back to where I had been at first, because it hadn't seemed quite
so bad from there.

'Well?' said Corky anxiously.

I hesitated a bit.

'Of course, old man, I only saw the kid once, and then only for a
moment, but--but it _was_ an ugly sort of kid, wasn't it, if I remember
rightly?'

'As ugly as that?'

I looked again, and honesty compelled me to be frank.

'I don't see how it could have been, old chap.'

Poor old Corky ran his fingers through his hair in a temperamental sort
of way. He groaned.

'You're quite right, Bertie. Something's gone wrong with the darned
thing. My private impression is that, without knowing it, I've worked
that stunt that Sargent used to pull--painting the soul of the sitter.
I've got through the mere outward appearance, and have put the child's
soul on canvas.'

'But could a child of that age have a soul like that? I don't see how
he could have managed it in the time. What do you think, Jeeves?'

'I doubt it, sir.'

'It--it sort of leers at you, doesn't it?'

'You've noticed that, too?' said Corky.

'I don't see how one could help noticing.'

'All I tried to do was to give the little brute a cheerful expression.
But, as it has worked out, he looks positively dissipated.'

'Just what I was going to suggest, old man. He looks as if he were in
the middle of a colossal spree, and enjoying every minute of it. Don't
you think so, Jeeves?'

'He has a decidedly inebriated air, sir.'

Corky was starting to say something, when the door opened and the uncle
came in.

For about three seconds all was joy, jollity and goodwill. The old boy
shook hands with me, slapped Corky on the back, said he didn't think
he had ever seen such a fine day, and whacked his leg with his stick.
Jeeves had projected himself into the background, and he didn't notice
him.

'Well, Bruce, my boy; so the portrait is really finished, is it--really
finished? Well, bring it out. Let's have a look at it. This will be a
wonderful surprise for your aunt. Where is it? Let's--'

And then he got it--suddenly, when he wasn't set for the punch; and he
rocked back on his heels.

'Oosh!' he exclaimed. And for perhaps a minute there was one of the
scaliest silences I've ever run up against.

'Is this a practical joke?' he said at last, in a way that set about
sixteen draughts cutting through the room at once.

I thought it was up to me to rally round old Corky.

'You want to stand a bit farther away from it,' I said.

'You're perfectly right!' he snorted. 'I do! I want to stand so far
away from it that I can't see the thing with a telescope!' He turned
on Corky like an untamed tiger of the jungle who has just located a
chunk of meat. 'And this--this--is what you have been wasting your
time and my money for all these years! A painter! I wouldn't let you
paint a house of mine. I gave you this commission, thinking that you
were a competent worker, and this--this--this extract from a comic
supplement is the result!' He swung towards the door, lashing his tail
and growling to himself. 'This ends it. If you wish to continue this
foolery of pretending to be an artist because you want an excuse for
idleness, please yourself. But let me tell you this. Unless you report
at my office on Monday morning, prepared to abandon all this idiocy
and start in at the bottom of the business to work your way up, as you
should have done half a dozen years ago, not another cent--not another
cent--not another--Boosh!'

Then the door closed and he was no longer with us. And I crawled out of
the bomb-proof shelter.

'Corky, old top!' I whispered faintly.

Corky was standing staring at the picture. His face was set. There was
a hunted look in his eye.

'Well, that finishes it!' he muttered brokenly.

'What are you going to do?'

'Do? What can I do? I can't stick on here if he cuts off supplies. You
heard what he said. I shall have to go to the office on Monday.'

I couldn't think of a thing to say. I knew exactly how he felt about
the office. I don't know when I've been so infernally uncomfortable. It
was like hanging round trying to make conversation to a pal who's just
been sentenced to twenty years in quod.

And then a soothing voice broke the silence.

'If I might make a suggestion, sir!'

It was Jeeves. He had slid from the shadows and was gazing gravely
at the picture. Upon my word, I can't give you a better idea of the
shattering effect of Corky's Uncle Alexander when in action than by
saying that he had absolutely made me forget for the moment that Jeeves
was there.

'I wonder if I have ever happened to mention to you, sir, a Mr Digby
Thistleton, with whom I was once in service? Perhaps you have met him?
He was a financier. He is now Lord Bridgworth. It was a favourite
saying of his that there is always a way. The first time I heard him
use the expression was after the failure of a patent depilatory which
he promoted.'

'Jeeves,' I said, 'what on earth are you talking about?'

'I mentioned Mr Thistleton, sir, because his was in some respects a
parallel case to the present one. His depilatory failed, but he did
not despair. He put it on the market again under the name of Hair-o,
guaranteed to produce a full crop of hair in a few months. It was
advertised, if you remember, sir, by a humorous picture of a billiard
ball, before and after taking, and made such a substantial fortune that
Mr Thistleton was soon afterwards elevated to the peerage for services
to his Party. It seems to me that, if Mr Corcoran looks into the
matter, he will find, like Mr Thistleton, that there is always a way.
Mr Worple himself suggested the solution of the difficulty. In the heat
of the moment he compared the portrait to an extract from a coloured
comic supplement. I consider the suggestion a very valuable one, sir.
Mr Corcoran's portrait may not have pleased Mr Worple as a likeness of
his only child, but I have no doubt that editors would gladly consider
it as a foundation for a series of humorous drawings. If Mr Corcoran
will allow me to make the suggestion, his talent has always been for
the humorous. There is something about this picture--something bold and
vigorous, which arrests the attention. I feel sure it would be highly
popular.'

Corky was glaring at the picture, and making a sort of dry, sucking
noise with his mouth. He seemed completely overwrought.

And then suddenly he began to laugh in a wild way.

'Corky, old man!' I said, massaging him tenderly. I feared the poor
blighter was hysterical.

He began to stagger about all over the floor.

'He's right! The man's absolutely right! Jeeves, you're a life-saver.
You've hit on the greatest idea of the age. Report at the office on
Monday! Start at the bottom of the business! I'll buy the business if I
feel like it. I know the man who runs the comic section of the _Sunday
Star_. He'll eat this thing. He was telling me only the other day how
hard it was to get a good new series. He'll give me anything I ask for
a real winner like this. I've got a gold mine. Where's my hat? I've
got an income for life! Where's that confounded hat? Lend me a five,
Bertie. I want to take a taxi down to Park Row!'

Jeeves smiled paternally. Or, rather, he had a kind of paternal
muscular spasm about the mouth, which is the nearest he ever gets to
smiling.

'If I might make the suggestion, Mr Corcoran--for a title of the series
which you have in mind--"The Adventures of Baby Blobbs".'

Corky and I looked at the picture, then at each other in an awed way.
Jeeves was right. There could be no other title.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Jeeves,' I said. It was a few weeks later, and I had just finished
looking at the comic section of the _Sunday Star_. 'I'm an optimist. I
always have been. The older I get, the more I agree with Shakespeare
and those poet Johnnies about it always being darkest before the dawn
and there's a silver lining and what you lose on the swings you make
up on the roundabouts. Look at Mr Corcoran, for instance. There was a
fellow, one would have said, clear up to the eyebrows in the soup. To
all appearances he had got it right in the neck. Yet look at him now.
Have you seen these pictures?'

'I took the liberty of glancing at them before bringing them to you,
sir. Extremely diverting.'

'They have made a big hit, you know.'

'I anticipated it, sir.'

I leaned back against the pillows.

'You know, Jeeves, you're a genius. You ought to be drawing a
commission on these things.'

'I have nothing to complain of in that respect, sir. Mr Corcoran has
been most generous. I am putting out the brown suit, sir.'

'No, I think I'll wear the blue with the faint red stripe.'

'Not the blue with the faint red stripe, sir.'

'But I rather fancy myself in it.'

'Not the blue with the faint red stripe, sir.'

'Oh, all right, have it your own way.'

'Very good, sir. Thank you, sir.'




                   3--Jeeves and the Unbidden Guest


I'm not absolutely certain of my facts, but I rather fancy it's
Shakespeare--or, if not, it's some equally brainy bird--who says that
it's always just when a fellow is feeling particularly braced with
things in general that Fate sneaks up behind him with the bit of lead
piping. And what I'm driving at is that the man is perfectly right.
Take, for instance, the business of Lady Malvern and her son Wilmot.
That was one of the scaliest affairs I was ever mixed up with, and a
moment before they came into my life I was just thinking how thoroughly
all right everything was.

I was still in New York when the thing started, and it was about
the time of year when New York is at its best. It was one of those
topping mornings, and I had just climbed out from under the cold
shower, feeling like a million dollars. As a matter of fact, what was
bucking me up more than anything was the fact that the day before I
had asserted myself with Jeeves--absolutely asserted myself, don't you
know. You see, the way things had been going on I was rapidly becoming
a dashed serf. The man had jolly well oppressed me. I didn't so much
mind when he made me give up one of my new suits, because Jeeves's
judgement about suits is sound and can generally be relied upon.

But I as near as a toucher rebelled when he wouldn't let me wear a pair
of cloth-topped boots which I loved like a couple of brothers. And,
finally, when he tried to tread on me like a worm in the matter of a
hat, I put the Wooster foot down and showed him in no uncertain manner
who was who.

It's a long story, and I haven't time to tell you now, but the nub of
the thing was that he wanted me to wear the White House Wonder--as worn
by President Coolidge--when I had set my heart on the Broadway Special,
much patronized by the Younger Set; and the end of the matter was that,
after a rather painful scene, I bought the Broadway Special. So that's
how things were on this particular morning, and I was feeling pretty
manly and independent.

Well, I was in the bathroom, wondering what there was going to be
for breakfast while I massaged the spine with a rough towel and sang
slightly, when there was a tap at the door. I stopped singing and
opened the door an inch.

'What ho, without there!' I said.

'Lady Malvern has called, sir.'

'Eh?'

'Lady Malvern, sir. She is waiting in the sitting-room.'

'Pull yourself together, Jeeves, my man,' I said rather severely, for I
bar practical jokes before breakfast. 'You know perfectly well there's
no one waiting for me in the sitting-room. How could there be when it's
barely ten o'clock yet?'

'I gathered from her ladyship, sir, that she had landed from an ocean
liner at an early hour this morning.'

This made the thing a bit more plausible. I remembered that when I
had arrived in America about a year before, the proceedings had begun
at some ghastly hour like six, and that I had been shot out on to a
foreign shore considerably before eight.

'Who the deuce is Lady Malvern, Jeeves?'

'Her ladyship did not confide in me, sir.'

'Is she alone?'

'Her ladyship is accompanied by a Lord Pershore, sir. I fancy that his
lordship would be her ladyship's son.'

'Oh, well, put out rich raiment of sorts, and I'll be dressing.'

'Our heather-mixture lounge is in readiness, sir.'

'Then lead me to it.'

While I was dressing I kept trying to think who on earth Lady Malvern
could be. It wasn't till I had climbed through the top of my shirt and
was reaching out for the studs that I remembered.

'I've placed her, Jeeves. She's a pal of my Aunt Agatha.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'Yes. I met her at lunch one Sunday before I left London. A very
vicious specimen. Writes books. She wrote a book on social conditions
in India when she came back from the Durbar.'

'Yes, sir? Pardon me, sir, but not that tie.'

'Eh?'

'Not that tie with the heather-mixture lounge, sir.'

It was a shock to me. I thought I had quelled the fellow. It was rather
a solemn moment. What I mean is, if I weakened now, all my good work
the night before would be thrown away. I braced myself.

'What's wrong with this tie? I've seen you give it a nasty look before.
Speak out like a man! What's the matter with it?'

'Too ornate, sir.'

'Nonsense! A cheerful pink. Nothing more.'

'Unsuitable, sir.'

'Jeeves, this is the tie I wear!'

'Very good, sir.'

Dashed unpleasant. I could see that the man was wounded. But I was
firm. I tied the tie, got into the coat and waistcoat, and went into
the sitting-room.

'Hullo-ullo-ullo!' I said. 'What?'

'Ah! How do you do, Mr Wooster? You have never met my son Wilmot, I
think? Motty, darling, this is Mr Wooster.'

Lady Malvern was a hearty, happy, healthy, overpowering sort of dashed
female, not so very tall but making up for it by measuring about six
feet from the O. P. to the Prompt Side. She fitted into my biggest
arm-chair as if it had been built round her by someone who knew they
were wearing arm-chairs tight about the hips that season. She had
bright, bulging eyes and a lot of yellow hair, and when she spoke she
showed about fifty-seven front teeth. She was one of those women who
kind of numb a fellow's faculties. She made me feel as if I were ten
years old and had been brought into the drawing-room in my Sunday
clothes to say how-d'you-do. Altogether by no means the sort of thing a
chappie would wish to find in his sitting-room before breakfast.

Motty, the son, was about twenty-three, tall and thin and meek-looking.
He had the same yellow hair as his mother, but he wore it plastered
down and parted in the middle. His eyes bulged, too, but they weren't
bright. They were a dull grey with pink rims. His chin gave up the
struggle about half-way down, and he didn't appear to have any
eyelashes. A mild, furtive, sheepish sort of blighter, in short.

'Awfully glad to see you,' I said, though this was far from the case,
for already I was beginning to have a sort of feeling that dirty work
was threatening in the offing. 'So you've popped over, eh? Making a
long stay in America?'

'About a month. Your aunt gave me your address and told me to be sure
to call on you.'

I was glad to hear this, for it seemed to indicate that Aunt Agatha
was beginning to come round a bit. As I believe I told you before,
there had been some slight unpleasantness between us, arising from the
occasion when she had sent me over to New York to disentangle my cousin
Gussie from the clutches of a girl on the music-hall stage. When I tell
you that by the time I had finished my operations Gussie had not only
married the girl but had gone on the Halls himself and was doing well,
you'll understand that relations were a trifle strained between aunt
and nephew.

I simply hadn't dared go back and face her, and it was a relief to
find that time had healed the wound enough to make her tell her pals
to call on me. What I mean is, much as I liked America, I didn't want
to have England barred to me for the rest of my natural; and, believe
me, England is a jolly sight too small for anyone to live in with Aunt
Agatha, if she's really on the war-path. So I was braced at hearing
these words and smiled genially on the assemblage.

'Your aunt said that you would do anything that was in your power to be
of assistance to us.'

'Rather! Oh, rather. Absolutely.'

'Thank you so much. I want you to put dear Motty up for a little while.'

I didn't get this for a moment.

'Put him up? For my clubs?'

'No, no! Darling Motty is essentially a home bird. Aren't you, Motty,
darling?'

Motty, who was sucking the knob of his stick, uncorked himself.

'Yes, mother,' he said, and corked himself up again.

'I should not like him to belong to clubs. I mean put him up here. Have
him to live with you while I am away.'

These frightful words trickled out of her like honey. The woman simply
didn't seem to understand the ghastly nature of her proposal. I gave
Motty the swift east-to-west. He was sitting with his mouth nuzzling
the stick, blinking at the wall. The thought of having this planted on
me for an indefinite period appalled me. Absolutely appalled me, don't
you know. I was just starting to say that the shot wasn't on the board
at any price, and that the first sign Motty gave of trying to nestle
into my little home I would yell for the police, when she went on,
rolling placidly over me, as it were.

There was something about this woman that sapped one's will-power.

'I am leaving New York by the midday train, as I have to pay a visit
to Sing-Sing prison. I am extremely interested in prison conditions
in America. After that I work my way gradually across to the coast,
visiting the points of interest on the journey. You see, Mr Wooster,
I am in America principally on business. No doubt you read my book,
_India and the Indians_? My publishers are anxious for me to write a
companion volume on the United States. I shall not be able to spend
more than a month in the country, as I have to get back for the season,
but a month should be ample. I was less than a month in India, and my
dear friend Sir Roger Cremorne wrote his _America from Within_ after a
stay of only two weeks. I should love to take dear Motty with me, but
the poor boy gets so sick when he travels by train. I shall have to
pick him up on my return.'

From where I sat I could see Jeeves in the dining-room, laying the
breakfast-table. I wished I could have had a minute with him alone.
I felt certain that he would have been able to think of some way of
putting a stop to this woman.

'It will be such a relief to know that Motty is safe with you, Mr
Wooster. I know what the temptations of a great city are. Hitherto dear
Motty has been sheltered from them. He has lived quietly with me in the
country. I know that you will look after him carefully, Mr Wooster.
He will give very little trouble.' She talked about the poor blighter
as if he wasn't there. Not that Motty seemed to mind. He had stopped
chewing his walking-stick and was sitting there with his mouth open.
'He is a vegetarian and a teetotaller and is devoted to reading. Give
him a nice book and he will be quite contented.' She got up. 'Thank
you so much, Mr Wooster. I don't know what I should have done without
your help. Come, Motty. We have just time to see a few of the sights
before my train goes. But I shall have to rely on you for most of my
information about New York, darling. Be sure to keep your eyes open and
take notes of your impressions. It will be such a help. Good-bye, Mr
Wooster. I will send Motty back early in the afternoon.'

They went out, and I howled for Jeeves.

'Jeeves!'

'Sir?'

'What's to be done? You heard it all, didn't you? You were in the
dining-room most of the time. That pill is coming to stay here.'

'Pill, sir?'

'The excrescence.'

'I beg your pardon, sir?'

I looked at Jeeves sharply. This sort of thing wasn't like him. Then I
understood. The man was really upset about that tie. He was trying to
get his own back.

'Lord Pershore will be staying here from tonight, Jeeves,' I said
coldly.

'Very good, sir. Breakfast is ready, sir.'

I could have sobbed into the bacon and eggs. That there wasn't any
sympathy to be got out of Jeeves was what put the lid on it. For a
moment I almost weakened and told him to destroy the hat and tie if he
didn't like them, but I pulled myself together again. I was dashed if I
was going to let Jeeves treat me like a bally one-man chain-gang.

But, what with brooding on Jeeves and brooding on Motty, I was in a
pretty reduced sort of state. The more I examined the situation, the
more blighted it became. There was nothing I could do. If I slung Motty
out, he would report to his mother, and she would pass it on to Aunt
Agatha, and I didn't like to think what would happen then. Sooner or
later I should be wanting to go back to England, and I didn't want
to get there and find Aunt Agatha waiting on the quay for me with a
stuffed eelskin. There was absolutely nothing for it but to put the
fellow up and make the best of it.

About midday Motty's luggage arrived, and soon afterwards a large
parcel of what I took to be nice books. I brightened up a little when
I saw it. It was one of those massive parcels and looked as if it
had enough in it to keep him busy for a year. I felt a trifle more
cheerful, and I got my Broadway Special and stuck it on my head, and
gave the pink tie a twist, and reeled out to take a bite of lunch
with one or two of the lads at a neighbouring hostelry; and what with
excellent browsing and sluicing and cheery conversation and what-not,
the afternoon passed quite happily. By dinner-time I had almost
forgotten Motty's existence.

I dined at the club and looked in at a show afterwards, and it wasn't
till fairly late that I got back to the flat. There were no signs of
Motty, and I took it that he had gone to bed.

It seemed rummy to me, though, that the parcel of nice books was still
there with the string and paper on it. It looked as if Motty, after
seeing mother off at the station, had decided to call it a day.

Jeeves came in with the nightly whisky and soda. I could tell by the
chappie's manner that he was still upset.

'Lord Pershore gone to bed, Jeeves?' I asked, with reserved hauteur and
what-not.

'No sir. His lordship has not yet returned.'

'Not returned? What do you mean?'

'His lordship came in shortly after six-thirty, and, having dressed,
went out again.'

At this moment there was a noise outside the front door, a sort of
scrabbling noise, as if somebody were trying to paw his way through the
woodwork. Then a sort of thud.

'Better go and see what that is, Jeeves.'

'Very good, sir.'

He went out and came back again.

'If you would not mind stepping this way sir, I think we might be able
to carry him in.'

'Carry him in?'

'His lordship is lying on the mat, sir.'

I went to the front door. The man was right. There was Motty huddled up
outside on the floor. He was moaning a bit.

'He's had some sort of dashed fit,' I said. I took another look.
'Jeeves! Someone's been feeding him meat!'

'Sir?'

'He's a vegetarian, you know. He must have been digging into a steak or
something. Call up a doctor!'

'I hardly think it will be necessary, sir. If you would take his
lordship's legs, while I--'

'Great Scott, Jeeves! You don't think--he can't be--'

'I am inclined to think so, sir.'

And, by Jove, he was right! Once on the right track, you couldn't
mistake it. Motty was under the surface. Completely sozzled.

It was the deuce of a shock.

'You never can tell, Jeeves!'

'Very seldom, sir.'

'Remove the eye of authority and where are you?'

'Precisely, sir.'

'Where is my wandering boy tonight and all that sort of thing, what?'

'It would seem so, sir.'

'Well, we had better bring him in, eh?'

'Yes, sir.'

So we lugged him in, and Jeeves put him to bed, and I lit a cigarette
and sat down to think the thing over. I had a kind of foreboding. It
seemed to me that I had let myself in for something pretty rocky.

Next morning, after I had sucked down a thoughtful cup of tea, I went
into Motty's room to investigate. I expected to find the fellow a
wreck, but there he was, sitting up in bed, quite chirpy, reading
_Gingery Stories_.

'What ho!' I said.

'What ho!' said Motty.

'What ho! What ho!'

'What ho! What ho! What ho!'

After that it seemed rather difficult to go on with the conversation.

'How are you feeling this morning?' I asked.

'Topping!' replied Motty, blithely and with abandon. 'I say, you know,
that fellow of yours--Jeeves, you know--is a corker. I had a most
frightful headache when I woke up, and he brought me a sort of rummy
dark drink, and it put me right again at once. Said it was his own
invention. I must see more of that lad. He seems to me distinctly one
of the ones.'

I couldn't believe that this was the same blighter who had sat and
sucked his stick the day before.

'You ate something that disagreed with you last night, didn't you?' I
said, by way of giving him a chance to slide out of it if he wanted to.
But he wouldn't have it at any price.

'No!' he replied firmly. 'I didn't do anything of the kind. I drank
too much. Much too much. Lots and lots too much. And, what's more, I'm
going to do it again. I'm going to do it every night. If ever you see
me sober, old top,' he said, with a kind of holy exaltation, 'tap me
on the shoulder and say, "Tut! Tut!" and I'll apologize and remedy the
defect.'

'But I say, you know, what about me?'

'What about you?'

'Well, I'm, so to speak, as it were, kind of responsible for you. What
I mean to say is, if you go doing this sort of thing I'm apt to get in
the soup somewhat.'

'I can't help your troubles,' said Motty firmly. 'Listen to me, old
thing: this is the first time in my life that I've had a real chance to
yield to the temptations of a great city. What's the use of a great
city having temptations if fellows don't yield to them? Makes it so
bally discouraging for the great city. Besides, mother told me to keep
my eyes open and collect impressions.'

I sat on the edge of the bed. I felt dizzy.

'I know just how you feel, old dear,' said Motty consolingly. 'And,
if my principles would permit it, I would simmer down for your sake.
But duty first! This is the first time I've been let out alone, and I
mean to make the most of it. We're only young once. Why interfere with
life's morning? Young man, rejoice in thy youth! Tra-la! What ho!'

Put like that, it did seem reasonable.

'All my bally life, dear boy,' Motty went on, 'I've been cooped up in
the ancestral home at Much Middlefold, in Shropshire, and till you've
been cooped up in Much Middlefold you don't know what cooping is. The
only time we get any excitement is when one of the choir-boys is caught
sucking chocolate during the sermon. When that happens, we talk about
it for days. I've got about a month of New York, and I mean to store
up a few happy memories for the long winter evenings. This is my only
chance to collect a past, and I'm going to do it. Now tell me, old
sport, as man to man, how does one get in touch with that very decent
bird Jeeves? Does one ring a bell or shout a bit? I should like to
discuss the subject of a good stiff b-and-s with him.'

       *       *       *       *       *

I had had a sort of vague idea, don't you know, that if I stuck close
to Motty and went about the place with him, I might act as a bit of a
damper on the gaiety. What I mean is, I thought that if, when he was
being the life and soul of the party, he were to catch my reproving eye
he might ease up a trifle on the revelry. So the next night I took him
along to supper with me. It was the last time. I'm a quiet, peaceful
sort of bloke who has lived all his life in London, and I can't stand
the pace these swift sportsmen from the rural districts set. What I
mean to say is, I'm all for rational enjoyment and so forth, but I
think a chappie makes himself conspicuous when he throws soft-boiled
eggs at the electric fan. And decent mirth and all that sort of thing
are all right, but I do bar dancing on tables and having to dash all
over the place dodging waiters, managers, and chuckers-out, just when
you want to sit still and digest.

Directly I managed to tear myself away that night and get home, I made
up my mind that this was jolly well the last time that I went about
with Motty. The only time I met him late at night after that was once
when I passed the door of a fairly low-down sort of restaurant and had
to step aside to dodge him as he sailed through the air _en route_ for
the opposite pavement, with a muscular sort of looking fellow peering
out after him with a kind of gloomy satisfaction.

In a way, I couldn't help sympathizing with the chap. He had about
four weeks to have the good time that ought to have been spread over
about ten years, and I didn't wonder at his wanting to be pretty busy.
I should have been just the same in his place. Still, there was no
denying that it was a bit thick. If it hadn't been for the thought of
Lady Malvern and Aunt Agatha in the background, I should have regarded
Motty's rapid work with an indulgent smile. But I couldn't get rid of
the feeling that, sooner or later, I was the lad who was scheduled
to get it behind the ear. And what with brooding on this prospect,
and sitting up in the old flat waiting for the familiar footstep, and
putting it to bed when it got there, and stealing into the sick-chamber
next morning to contemplate the wreckage, I was beginning to lose
weight. Absolutely becoming the good old shadow, I give you my honest
word. Starting at sudden noises and what-not.

And no sympathy from Jeeves. That was what cut me to the quick. The man
was still thoroughly pipped about the hat and tie, and simply wouldn't
rally round. One morning I wanted comforting so much that I sank the
pride of the Woosters and appealed to the fellow direct.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'this is getting a bit thick!'

'Sir?'

'You know what I mean. This lad seems to have chucked all the
principles of a well-spent boyhood. He has got it up his nose!'

'Yes, sir.'

'Well, I shall get blamed, don't you know. You know what my Aunt Agatha
is.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Very well, then.'

I waited a moment, but he wouldn't unbend.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'haven't you any scheme up your sleeve for coping
with this blighter?'

'No, sir.'

And he shimmered off to his lair. Obstinate devil! So dashed absurd,
don't you know. It wasn't as if there was anything wrong with that
Broadway Special hat. It was a remarkably priceless effort, and much
admired by the lads. But, just because he preferred the White House
Wonder, he left me flat.

It was shortly after this that young Motty got the idea of bringing
pals back in the small hours to continue the gay revels in the home.
This was where I began to crack under the strain. You see, the part
of town where I was living wasn't the right place for that sort of
thing. I knew lots of chappies down Washington Square way who started
the evening at about two a.m.--artists and writers and so forth who
frolicked considerably till checked by the arrival of the morning
milk. That was all right. They like that sort of thing down there. The
neighbours can't get to sleep unless there's someone dancing Hawaiian
dances over their heads. But on Fifty-seventh Street the atmosphere
wasn't right, and when Motty turned up at three in the morning with a
collection of hearty lads, who only stopped singing their college song
when they started singing 'The Old Oaken Bucket', there was a marked
peevishness among the old settlers in the flats. The management was
extremely terse over the telephone at breakfast-time, and took a lot of
soothing.

The next night I came home early, after a lonely dinner at a place
which I'd chosen because there didn't seem any chance of meeting Motty
there. The sitting-room was quite dark, and I was just moving to switch
on the light, when there was a sort of explosion and something collared
hold of my trouser-leg. Living with Motty had reduced me to such an
extent that I was simply unable to cope with this thing. I jumped
backward with a loud yell of anguish, and tumbled out into the hall
just as Jeeves came out of his den to see what the matter was.

'Did you call, sir?'

'Jeeves! There's something in there that grabs you by the leg!'

'That would be Rollo, sir.'

'Eh?'

'I would have warned you of his presence, but I did not hear you come
in. His temper is a little uncertain at present, as he has not yet
settled down.'

'Who the deuce is Rollo?'

'His lordship's bull-terrier, sir. His lordship won him in a raffle,
and tied him to the leg of the table. If you will allow me, sir, I will
go in and switch on the light.'

There really is nobody like Jeeves. He walked straight into the
sitting-room, the biggest feat since Daniel and the lions' den, without
a quiver. What's more, his magnetism or whatever they call it was such
that the dashed animal, instead of pinning him by the leg, calmed down
as if he had had a bromide, and rolled over on his back with all his
paws in the air. If Jeeves had been his rich uncle he couldn't have
been more chummy. Yet directly he caught sight of me again, he got all
worked up and seemed to have only one idea in life--to start chewing me
where he had left off.

'Rollo is not used to you yet, sir,' said Jeeves, regarding the bally
quadruped in an admiring sort of way. 'He is an excellent watch-dog.'

'I don't want a watch-dog to keep me out of my rooms.'

'No, sir.'

'Well, what am I to do?'

'No doubt in time the animal will learn to discriminate, sir. He will
learn to distinguish your peculiar scent.'

'What do you mean--my peculiar scent? Correct the impression that I
intend to hang about in the hall while life slips by, in the hope that
one of these days that dashed animal will decide that I smell all
right.' I thought for a bit. 'Jeeves!'

'Sir?'

'I'm going away--tomorrow morning by the first train. I shall go and
stop with Mr Todd in the country.'

'Do you wish me to accompany you, sir?'

'No.'

'Very good, sir.'

'I don't know when I shall be back. Forward my letters.'

'Yes, sir.'

       *       *       *       *       *

As a matter of fact, I was back within the week. Rocky Todd, the pal I
went to stay with, is a rummy sort of a chap who lives all alone in the
wilds of Long Island, and likes it; but a little of that sort of thing
goes a long way with me. Dear old Rocky is one of the best, but after
a few days in his cottage in the woods, miles away from anywhere, New
York, even with Motty on the premises, began to look pretty good to me.
The days down on Long Island have forty-eight hours in them, you can't
get to sleep at night because of the bellowing of the crickets; and
you have to walk two miles for a drink and six for an evening paper. I
thanked Rocky for his kind hospitality, and caught the only train they
have down in those parts. It landed me in New York about dinner-time.
I went straight to the old flat. Jeeves came out of his lair. I looked
round cautiously for Rollo.

'Where's that dog, Jeeves? Have you got him tied up?'

'The animal is no longer here, sir. His lordship gave him to the
porter, who sold him. His lordship took a prejudice against the animal
on account of being bitten by him in the calf of the leg.'

I don't think I've ever been so bucked by a bit of news. I felt I had
misjudged Rollo. Evidently, when you got to know him better, he had a
lot of good in him.

'Fine!' I said. 'Is Lord Pershore in, Jeeves?'

'No, sir.'

'Do you expect him back to dinner?'

'No, sir.'

'Where is he?'

'In prison, sir.'

'In prison!'

'Yes, sir.'

'You don't mean--in prison?'

'Yes, sir.'

I lowered myself into a chair.

'Why?' I said.

'He assaulted a constable, sir.'

'Lord Pershore assaulted a constable!'

'Yes, sir.'

I digested this.

'But, Jeeves, I say! This is frightful!'

'Sir?'

'What will Lady Malvern say when she finds out?'

'I do not fancy that her ladyship will find out, sir.'

'But she'll come back and want to know where he is.'

'I rather fancy, sir, that his lordship's bit of time will have run out
by then.'

'But supposing it hasn't?'

'In that event, sir, it may be judicious to prevaricate a little.'

'How?'

'If I might make the suggestion, sir, I should inform her ladyship that
his lordship has left for a short visit to Boston.'

'Why Boston?'

'Very interesting and respectable centre, sir.'

'Jeeves, I believe you've hit it.'

'I fancy so, sir.'

'Why, this is really the best thing that could have happened. If this
hadn't turned up to prevent him, young Motty would have been in a
sanatorium by the time Lady Malvern got back.'

'Exactly, sir.'

The more I looked at it in that way, the sounder this prison wheeze
seemed to me. There was no doubt in the world that prison was just what
the doctor ordered for Motty. It was the only thing that could have
pulled him up. I was sorry for the poor blighter, but after all, I
reflected, a fellow who had lived all his life with Lady Malvern, in a
small village in the interior of Shropshire, wouldn't have much to kick
at in a prison. Altogether, I began to feel absolutely braced again.
Life became like what the poet Johnnie says--one grand, sweet song.
Things went on so comfortably and peacefully for a couple of weeks that
I give you my word that I'd almost forgotten such a person as Motty
existed. The only flaw in the scheme of things was that Jeeves was
still pained and distant. It wasn't anything he said, or did, mind you,
but there was a rummy something about him all the time. Once when I was
tying the pink tie I caught sight of him in the looking-glass. There
was a kind of grieved look in his eye.

And then Lady Malvern came back, a good bit ahead of schedule. I hadn't
been expecting her for days. I'd forgotten how time had been slipping
along. She turned up one morning while I was still in bed sipping tea
and thinking of this and that. Jeeves flowed in with the announcement
that he had just loosed her into the sitting-room. I draped a few
garments round me and went in.

There she was, sitting in the same arm-chair, looking as massive as
ever. The only difference was that she didn't uncover the teeth as she
had done the first time.

'Good morning,' I said. 'So you've got back, what?'

'I have got back.'

There was something sort of bleak about her tone, rather as if she had
swallowed an east wind. This I took to be due to the fact that she
probably hadn't breakfasted. It's only after a bit of breakfast that
I'm able to regard the world with that sunny cheeriness which makes
a fellow the universal favourite. I'm never much of a lad till I've
engulfed an egg or two and a beaker of coffee.

'I suppose you haven't breakfasted?'

'I have not yet breakfasted.'

'Won't you have an egg or something? Or a sausage or something? Or
something?'

'No, thank you.'

She spoke as if she belonged to an anti-sausage society or a league for
the suppression of eggs. There was a bit of a silence.

'I called on you last night,' she said, 'but you were out.'

'Awfully sorry. Had a pleasant trip?'

'Extremely, thank you.'

'See everything? Niagara Falls, Yellowstone Park, and the jolly old
Grand Canyon, and what-not?'

'I saw a great deal.'

There was another slightly _frappé_ silence. Jeeves floated silently
into the dining-room and began to lay the breakfast-table.

'I hope Wilmot was not in your way, Mr Wooster?'

I had been wondering when she was going to mention Motty.

'Rather not! Great pals. Hit it off splendidly.'

'You were his constant companion, then?'

'Absolutely. We were always together. Saw all the sights, don't you
know. We'd take in the Museum of Art in the morning, and have a bit of
lunch at some good vegetarian place, and then toddle along to a sacred
concert in the afternoon, and home to an early dinner. We usually
played dominoes after dinner. And then the early bed and the refreshing
sleep. We had a great time. I was awfully sorry when he went away to
Boston.'

'Oh! Wilmot is in Boston?'

'Yes. I ought to have let you know, but of course we didn't know where
you were. You were dodging all over the place like a snipe--I mean,
don't you know, dodging all over the place, and we couldn't get at you.
Yes, Motty went off to Boston.'

'You're sure he went to Boston?'

'Oh, absolutely.' I called out to Jeeves, who was now messing about in
the next room with forks and so forth: 'Jeeves, Lord Pershore didn't
change his mind about going to Boston, did he?'

'No, sir.'

'I thought I was right. Yes, Motty went to Boston.'

'Then how do you account, Mr Wooster, for the fact that when I went
yesterday afternoon to Blackwell's Island prison, to secure material
for my book, I saw poor, dear Wilmot there, dressed in a striped suit,
seated beside a pile of stones with a hammer in his hands?'

I tried to think of something to say, but nothing came. A fellow has
to be a lot broader about the forehead than I am to handle a jolt like
this. I strained the old bean till it creaked, but between the collar
and the hair parting nothing stirred. I was dumb. Which was lucky,
because I wouldn't have had a chance to get any persiflage out of my
system. Lady Malvern collared the conversation. She had been bottling
it up, and now it came out with a rush.

'So this is how you have looked after my poor, dear boy, Mr Wooster!
So this is how you have abused my trust! I left him in your charge,
thinking that I could rely on you to shield him from evil. He came to
you innocent, unversed in the ways of the world, confiding, unused to
the temptations of a large city, and you led him astray!'

I hadn't any remarks to make. All I could think of was the picture
of Aunt Agatha drinking all this in and reaching out to sharpen the
hatchet against my return.

'You deliberately--'

Far away in the misty distance a soft voice spoke:

'If I might explain, your ladyship.'

Jeeves had projected himself in from the dining-room and materialized
on the rug. Lady Malvern tried to freeze him with a look, but you can't
do that sort of thing to Jeeves. He is look-proof.

'I fancy, your ladyship, that you may have misunderstood Mr Wooster,
and that he may have given you the impression that he was in New York
when his lordship was--removed. When Mr Wooster informed your ladyship
that his lordship had gone to Boston, he was relying on the version
I had given him of his lordship's movements. Mr Wooster was away,
visiting a friend in the country, at the time, and knew nothing of the
matter till your ladyship informed him.'

Lady Malvern gave a kind of grunt. It didn't rattle Jeeves.

'I feared Mr Wooster might be disturbed if he knew the truth, as he is
so attached to his lordship and has taken such pains to look after him,
so I took the liberty of telling him that his lordship had gone away
for a visit. It might have been hard for Mr Wooster to believe that
his lordship had gone to prison voluntarily and from the best motives,
but your ladyship, knowing him better, will readily understand.'

'What!' Lady Malvern goggled at him. 'Did you say that Lord Pershore
went to prison voluntarily?'

'If I might explain, your ladyship. I think that your ladyship's
parting words made a deep impression on his lordship. I have frequently
heard him speak to Mr Wooster of his desire to do something to follow
your ladyship's instructions and collect material for your ladyship's
book on America. Mr Wooster will bear me out when I say that his
lordship was frequently extremely depressed at the thought that he was
doing so little to help.'

'Absolutely, by Jove! Quite pipped about it!' I said.

'The idea of making a personal examination into the prison system of
the country--from within--occurred to his lordship very suddenly one
night. He embraced it eagerly. There was no restraining him.'

Lady Malvern looked at Jeeves, then at me, then at Jeeves again. I
could see her struggling with the thing.

'Surely, your ladyship,' said Jeeves, 'it is more reasonable to suppose
that a gentleman of his lordship's character went to prison of his
own volition than that he committed some breach of the law which
necessitated his arrest?'

Lady Malvern blinked. Then she got up.

'Mr Wooster,' she said, 'I apologize. I have done you an injustice. I
should have known Wilmot better. I should have had more faith in his
pure, fine spirit.'

'Absolutely!' I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Your breakfast is ready, sir,' said Jeeves.

I sat down and dallied in a dazed sort of way with a poached egg.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'you are certainly a life-saver.'

'Thank you, sir.'

'Nothing would have convinced my Aunt Agatha, that I hadn't lured that
blighter into riotous living.'

'I fancy you are right, sir.'

I champed my egg for a bit. I was most awfully moved, don't you know,
by the way Jeeves had rallied round. Something seemed to tell me that
this was an occasion that called for rich rewards. For a moment I
hesitated. Then I made up my mind.

'Jeeves!'

'Sir?'

'That pink tie.'

'Yes, sir?'

'Burn it.'

'Thank you, sir.'

'And, Jeeves.'

'Yes, sir?'

'Take a taxi and get me that White House Wonder hat, as worn by
President Coolidge.'

'Thank you very much, sir.'

I felt most awfully braced. I felt as if the clouds had rolled away
and all was as it used to be. I felt like one of those chappies in the
novels who calls off the fight with his wife in the last chapter and
decides to forget and forgive. I felt I wanted to do all sorts of other
things to show Jeeves that I appreciated him.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'it isn't enough. Is there anything else you would
like?'

'Yes, sir. If I may make the suggestion--fifty dollars.'

'Fifty dollars?'

'It will enable me to pay a debt of honour, sir. I owe it to his
lordship.'

'You owe Lord Pershore fifty dollars?'

'Yes, sir. I happened to meet him in the street the night his lordship
was arrested. I had been thinking a good deal about the most suitable
method of inducing him to abandon his mode of living, sir. His lordship
was a little over-excited at the time, and I fancy that he mistook me
for a friend of his. At any rate, when I took the liberty of wagering
him fifty dollars that he would not punch a passing policeman in the
eye, he accepted the bet very cordially and won it.'

I produced my pocket-book and counted out a hundred.

'Take this, Jeeves,' I said; 'fifty isn't enough. Do you know, Jeeves,
you're--well, you absolutely stand alone!'

'I endeavour to give satisfaction, sir,' said Jeeves.




                   4--Jeeves and the Hard-Boiled Egg


Sometimes of a morning, as I've sat in bed sucking down the early cup
of tea and watched Jeeves flitting about the room and putting out the
raiment for the day, I've wondered what the deuce I should do if the
fellow ever took it into his head to leave me. It's not so bad when
I'm in New York, but in London the anxiety is frightful. There used
to be all sorts of attempts on the part of low blighters to sneak him
away from me. Young Reggie Foljambe to my certain knowledge offered him
double what I was giving him, and Alistair Bingham-Reeves, who's got a
valet who had been known to press his trousers sideways, used to look
at him, when he came to see me, with a kind of glittering, hungry eye
which disturbed me deucedly. Bally pirates!

The thing, you see, is that Jeeves is so dashed competent. You can spot
it even in the way he shoves studs into a shirt.

I rely on him absolutely in every crisis, and he never lets me down.
And, what's more, he can always be counted on to extend himself
on behalf of any pal of mine who happens to be to all appearances
knee-deep in the bouillon. Take the rather rummy case, for instance, of
dear old Bicky and his uncle, the hard-boiled egg.

It happened after I had been in America for a few months. I got back to
the flat latish one night, and when Jeeves brought me the final drink
he said:

'Mr Bickersteth called to see you this evening, sir, while you were
out.'

'Oh?' I said.

'Twice, sir. He appeared a trifle agitated.'

'What, pipped?'

'He gave that impression, sir.'

I sipped the whisky. I was sorry if Bicky was in trouble, but, as a
matter of fact, I was rather glad to have something I could discuss
freely with Jeeves just then, because things had been a bit strained
between us for some time, and it had been rather difficult to hit on
anything to talk about that wasn't apt to take a personal turn. You
see, I had decided--rightly or wrongly--to grow a moustache, and this
had cut Jeeves to the quick. He couldn't stick the thing at any price,
and I had been living ever since in an atmosphere of bally disapproval
till I was getting jolly well fed up with it. What I mean is, while
there's no doubt that in certain matters of dress Jeeves's judgement
is absolutely sound and should be followed, it seemed to me that it
was getting a bit too thick if he was going to edit my face as well
as my costume. No one can call me an unreasonable chappie, and many's
the time I've given in like a lamb when Jeeves has voted against one
of my pet suits or ties; but when it comes to a valet's staking out a
claim on your upper lip you've simply got to have a bit of the good old
bulldog pluck and defy the blighter.

'He said that he would call again later, sir.'

'Something must be up, Jeeves.'

'Yes, sir.'

I gave the moustache a thoughtful twirl. It seemed to hurt Jeeves a
good deal, so I chucked it.

'I see by the paper, sir, that Mr Bickersteth's uncle is arriving on
the _Carmantic_.'

'Yes?'

'His Grace the Duke of Chiswick, sir.'

This was news to me, that Bicky's uncle was a duke. Rum, how little one
knows about one's pals. I had met Bicky for the first time at a species
of beano or jamboree down in Washington Square, not long after my
arrival in New York. I suppose I was a bit homesick at the time, and I
rather took to Bicky when I found that he was an Englishman and had, in
fact, been up at Oxford with me. Besides, he was a frightful chump, so
we naturally drifted together; and while we were taking a quiet snort
in a corner that wasn't all cluttered up with artists and sculptors,
he furthermore endeared himself to me by a most extraordinarily gifted
imitation of a bull-terrier chasing a cat up a tree. But, though we had
subsequently become extremely pally, all I really knew about him was
that he was generally hard up, and had an uncle who relieved the strain
a bit from time to time by sending him monthly remittances.

'If the Duke of Chiswick is his uncle,' I said, 'why hasn't he a title?
Why isn't he Lord What-Not?'

'Mr Bickersteth is the son of His Grace's late sister, sir, who married
Captain Rollo Bickersteth of the Coldstream Guards.'

Jeeves knows everything.

'Is Mr Bickersteth's father dead too?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Leave any money?'

'No, sir.'

I began to understand why poor old Bicky was always more or less on the
rocks. To the casual and irreflective observer it may sound a pretty
good wheeze having a duke for an uncle, but the trouble about old
Chiswick was that, though an extremely wealthy old buster, owning half
London and about five counties up north, he was notoriously the most
prudent spender in England. He was what Americans call a hard-boiled
egg. If Bicky's people hadn't left him anything and he depended on what
he could prise out of the old duke, he was in a pretty bad way. Not
that that explained why he was hunting me like this, because he was a
chap who never borrowed money. He said he wanted to keep his pals, so
never bit anyone's ear on principle.

At this juncture the door-bell rang. Jeeves floated out to answer it.

'Yes, sir. Mr Wooster has just returned,' I heard him say. And Bicky
came beetling in, looking pretty sorry for himself.

'Hallo, Bicky,' I said. 'Jeeves told me you had been trying to get me.
What's the trouble, Bicky?'

'I'm in a hole, Bertie. I want your advice.'

'Say on, old lad.'

'My uncle's turning up tomorrow, Bertie.'

'So Jeeves told me.'

'The Duke of Chiswick, you know.'

'So Jeeves told me.'

Bicky seemed a bit surprised.

'Jeeves seems to know everything.'

'Rather rummily, that's exactly what I was thinking just now myself.'

'Well, I wish,' said Bicky, gloomily, 'that he knew a way to get me out
of the hole I'm in.'

'Mr Bickersteth is in a hole, Jeeves,' I said, 'and wants you to rally
round.'

'Very good, sir.'

Bicky looked a bit doubtful.

'Well, of course, you know, Bertie, this thing is by way of being a bit
private and all that.'

'I shouldn't worry about that, old top. I bet Jeeves knows all about it
already. Don't you, Jeeves?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Eh?' said Bicky, rattled.

'I am open to correction, sir, but is not your dilemma due to the fact
that you are at a loss to explain to His Grace why you are in New York
instead of in Colorado?'

Bicky rocked like a jelly in a high wind.

'How the deuce do you know anything about it?'

'I chanced to meet His Grace's butler before we left England. He
informed me that he happened to overhear His Grace speaking to you on
the matter, sir, as he passed the library door.'

Bicky gave a hollow sort of laugh.

'Well, as everybody seems to know all about it, there's no need to try
to keep it dark. The old boy turfed me out, Bertie, because he said
I was a brainless nincompoop. The idea was that he would give me a
remittance on condition that I dashed out to some blighted locality of
the name of Colorado and learned farming or ranching, or whatever they
call it, at some bally ranch or farm, or whatever it's called. I didn't
fancy the idea a bit. I should have had to ride horses and pursue cows,
and so forth. At the same time, don't you know, I had to have that
remittance.'

'I get you absolutely, old thing.'

'Well, when I got to New York it looked a decent sort of place to me,
so I thought it would be a pretty sound notion to stop here. So I
cabled to my uncle telling him that I had dropped into a good business
wheeze in the city and wanted to chuck the ranch idea. He wrote back
that it was all right, and here I've been ever since. He thinks I'm
doing well at something or other over here. I never dreamed, don't you
know, that he would ever come out here. What on earth am I to do?'

'Jeeves,' I said, 'what on earth is Mr Bickersteth to do?'

'You see,' said Bicky, 'I had a wireless from him to say that he was
coming to stay with me--to save hotel bills, I suppose. I've always
given him the impression that I was living in pretty good style. I
can't have him to stay at my boarding-house.'

'Thought of anything, Jeeves?' I said.

'To what extent, sir, if the question is not a delicate one, are you
prepared to assist Mr Bickersteth?'

'I'll do anything I can for you, of course, Bicky, old man.'

'Then, if I might make the suggestion, sir, you might lend Mr
Bickersteth--'

'No, by Jove!' said Bicky firmly. 'I never have touched you, Bertie,
and I'm not going to start now. I may be a chump, but it's my boast
that I don't owe a penny to a single soul--not counting tradesmen, of
course.'

'I was about to suggest, sir, that you might lend Mr Bickersteth this
flat. Mr Bickersteth could give His Grace the impression that he was
the owner of it. With your permission I could convey the notion that
I was in Mr Bickersteth's employment and not in yours. You would be
residing here temporarily as Mr Bickersteth's guest. His Grace would
occupy the second spare bedroom. I fancy that you would find this
answer satisfactory, sir.'

Bicky had stopped rocking himself and was staring at Jeeves in an awed
sort of way.

'I would advocate the dispatching of a wireless message to His Grace
on board the vessel, notifying him of the change of address. Mr
Bickersteth could meet His Grace at the dock and proceed directly here.
Will that meet the situation, sir?'

'Absolutely.'

'Thank you, sir.'

Bicky followed him with his eye till the door closed.

'How does he do it, Bertie?' he said. 'I'll tell you what I think it
is. I believe it's something to do with the shape of his head. Have you
ever noticed his head, Bertie, old man? It sort of sticks out at the
back!'

       *       *       *       *       *

I hopped out of bed pretty early next morning, so as to be among those
present when the old boy should arrive. I knew from experience that
these ocean liners fetch up at the dock at a deucedly ungodly hour.
It wasn't much after nine by the time I'd dressed and had my morning
tea and was leaning out of the window, watching the street for Bicky
and his uncle. It was one of those jolly, peaceful mornings that make
a chappie wish he'd got a soul or something, and I was just brooding
on life in general when I became aware of the dickens of a spat in
progress down below. A taxi had driven up, and an old boy in a top hat
had got out and was kicking up a frightful row about the fare. As far
as I could make out, he was trying to get the cabby to switch from New
York to London prices, and the cabby had apparently never heard of
London before, and didn't seem to think a lot of it now. The old boy
said that in London the trip would have set him back a shilling; and
the cabby said he should worry. I called to Jeeves.

'The duke has arrived, Jeeves.'

'Yes, sir?'

'That'll be him at the door now.'

Jeeves made a long arm and opened the front door, and the old boy
crawled in.

'How do you do, sir?' I said, bustling up and being the ray of
sunshine. 'Your nephew went down to the dock to meet you, but you
must have missed him. My name's Wooster, don't you know. Great pal of
Bicky's, and all that sort of thing. I'm staying with him, you know.
Would you like a cup of tea? Jeeves, bring a cup of tea.'

Old Chiswick had sunk into an arm-chair and was looking about the room.

'Does this luxurious flat belong to my nephew Francis?'

'Absolutely.'

'It must be terribly expensive.'

'Pretty well, of course. Everything costs a lot over here, you know.'

He moaned. Jeeves filtered in with the tea. Old Chiswick took a stab at
it to restore his tissues, and nodded.

'A terrible country, Mr Wooster! A terrible country. Nearly eight
shillings for a short cab-drive. Iniquitous!' He took another look
round the room. It seemed to fascinate him. 'Have you any idea how
much my nephew pays for this flat, Mr Wooster?'

'About two hundred dollars a month, I believe.'

'What! Forty pounds a month!'

I began to see that, unless I made the thing a bit more plausible,
the scheme might turn out a frost. I could guess what the old boy was
thinking. He was trying to square all this prosperity with what he knew
of poor old Bicky. And one had to admit that it took a lot of squaring,
for dear old Bicky, though a stout fellow and absolutely unrivalled as
an imitator of bull-terriers and cats, was in many ways one of the most
pronounced fatheads that ever pulled on a suit of gents' underwear.

'I suppose it seems rummy to you,' I said, 'but the fact is New York
often bucks fellows up and makes them show a flash of speed that you
wouldn't have imagined them capable of. It sort of develops them.
Something in the air, don't you know. I imagine that Bicky in the
past, when you knew him, may have been something of a chump, but it's
quite different now. Devilish efficient sort of bird, and looked on in
commercial circles as quite the nib!'

'I am amazed! What is the nature of my nephew's business, Mr Wooster?'

'Oh, just business, don't you know. The same sort of thing Rockefeller
and all these coves do, you know.' I slid for the door. 'Awfully sorry
to leave you, but I've got to meet some of the lads elsewhere.'

Coming out of the lift I met Bicky bustling in from the street.

'Hallo, Bertie. I missed him. Has he turned up?'

'He's upstairs now, having some tea.'

'What does he think of it all?'

'He's absolutely rattled.'

'Ripping! I'll be toddling up, then. Toodle-oo, Bertie, old man. See
you later.'

'Pip-pip, Bicky, dear boy.'

He trotted off, full of merriment and good cheer, and I went off to the
club to sit in the window and watch the traffic coming up one way and
going down the other.

It was latish in the evening when I looked in at the flat to dress for
dinner.

'Where's everybody, Jeeves?' I said, finding no little feet pattering
about the place. 'Gone out?'

'His Grace desired to see some of the sights of the city, sir. Mr
Bickersteth is acting as his escort. I fancy their immediate objective
was Grant's Tomb.'

'I suppose Mr Bickersteth is a bit bucked at the way things are
going--what?'

'Sir?'

'I say, I take it that Mr Bickersteth is tolerably full of beans.'

'Not altogether, sir.'

'What's his trouble now?'

'The scheme which I took the liberty of suggesting to Mr Bickersteth
and yourself has, unfortunately, not answered entirely satisfactorily,
sir.'

'Surely the duke believes that Mr Bickersteth is doing well in
business, and all that sort of thing?'

'Exactly, sir. With the result that he has decided to cancel Mr
Bickersteth's monthly allowance, on the ground that, as Mr Bickersteth
is doing so well on his own account, he no longer requires pecuniary
assistance.'

'Great Scott, Jeeves! This is awful!'

'Somewhat disturbing, sir.'

'I never expected anything like this!'

'I confess I scarcely anticipated the contingency myself, sir.'

'I suppose it bowled the poor blighter over absolutely?'

'Mr Bickersteth appeared somewhat taken aback, sir.'

My heart bled for Bicky.

'We must do something, Jeeves.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Can you think of anything?'

'Not at the moment, sir.'

'There must be something we can do.'

'It was a maxim of one of my former employers, sir--as I believe I
mentioned to you once before--the present Lord Bridgworth, that there
is always a way. No doubt we shall be able to discover some solution of
Mr Bickersteth's difficulty, sir.'

'Well, have a stab at it, Jeeves.'

'I will spare no pains, sir.'

I went and dressed sadly. It will show you pretty well how pipped I was
when I tell you that I as near as a toucher put on a white tie with a
dinner-jacket. I sallied out for a bit of food more to pass the time
than because I wanted it. It seemed brutal to be wading into the bill
of fare with poor old Bicky headed for the bread-line.

When I got back old Chiswick had gone to bed, but Bicky was there,
hunched up in an arm-chair, brooding pretty tensely, with a cigarette
hanging out of the corner of his mouth and a more or less glassy stare
in his eyes.

'This is a bit thick, old thing--what!' I said.

He picked up his glass and drained it feverishly, overlooking the fact
that it hadn't anything in it.

'I'm done, Bertie!' he said.

He had another go at the glass. It didn't seem to do him any good.

'If only this had happened a week later, Bertie! My next month's money
was due to roll in on Saturday. I could have worked a wheeze I've been
reading about in the magazine advertisements. It seems that you can
make a dashed amount of money if you can only collect a few dollars and
start a chicken farm. Jolly life, too, keeping hens!' He had begun to
get quite worked up at the thought of it, but he slopped back in his
chair at this juncture with a good deal of gloom. 'But, of course, it's
no good,' he said, 'because I haven't the cash.'

'You've only to say the word, you know, Bicky, old top.'

'Thanks awfully, Bertie, but I'm not going to sponge on you.'

That's always the way in this world. The chappies you'd like to lend
money to won't let you, whereas the chappies you don't want to lend
it to will do everything except actually stand you on your head and
lift the specie out of your pockets. As a lad who has always rolled
tolerably freely in the right stuff, I've had lots of experience of
the second class. Many's the time, back in London, I've hurried along
Piccadilly and felt the hot breath of the toucher on the back of my
neck and heard his sharp, excited yapping as he closed in on me. I've
simply spent my life scattering largesse to blighters I didn't care a
hang for; yet here was I now, dripping doubloons and pieces of eight
and longing to hand them over, and Bicky, poor fish, absolutely on his
uppers, not taking any at any price.

'Well, there's only one hope then.'

'What's that?'

'Jeeves.'

'Sir?'

There was Jeeves, standing behind me, full of zeal. In this matter of
shimmering into rooms the man is rummy to a degree. You're sitting in
the old arm-chair, thinking of this and that, and then suddenly you
look up, and there he is. He moves from point to point with as little
uproar as a jelly-fish. The thing startled poor old Bicky considerably.
He rose from his seat like a rocketing pheasant. I'm used to Jeeves
now, but often in the days when he first came to me I've bitten my
tongue freely on finding him unexpectedly in my midst.

'Did you call, sir?'

'Oh, there you are, Jeeves!'

'Precisely, sir.'

'Any ideas, Jeeves?'

'Why, yes, sir. Since we had our recent conversation I fancy I have
found what may prove a solution. I do not wish to appear to be taking
a liberty, sir, but I think that we have overlooked His Grace's
potentialities as a source of revenue.'

Bicky laughed what I have sometimes seen described as a hollow, mocking
laugh, a sort of bitter cackle from the back of the throat, rather like
a gargle.

'I do not allude, sir,' explained Jeeves, 'to the possibility of
inducing His Grace to part with money. I am taking the liberty of
regarding His Grace in the light of an at present--if I may say
so--useless property, which is capable of being developed.'

Bicky looked at me in a helpless kind of way. I'm bound to say I didn't
get it myself.

'Couldn't you make it a bit easier, Jeeves?'

'In a nutshell, sir, what I mean is this: His Grace is, in a sense, a
prominent personage. The inhabitants of this country, as no doubt you
are aware, sir, are peculiarly addicted to shaking hands with prominent
personages. It occurred to me that Mr Bickersteth or yourself might
know of persons who would be willing to pay a small fee--let us say
two dollars or three--for the privilege of an introduction, including
handshake, to His Grace.'

Bicky didn't seem to think much of it.

'Do you mean to say that anyone would be mug enough to part with solid
cash just to shake hands with my uncle?'

'I have an aunt, sir, who paid five shillings to a young fellow for
bringing a moving-picture actor to tea at her house one Sunday. It gave
her social standing among the neighbours.'

Bicky wavered.

'If you think it could be done--'

'I feel convinced of it, sir.'

'What do you think, Bertie?'

'I'm for it, old boy, absolutely. A very brainy wheeze.'

'Thank you, sir. Will there be anything further? Good night, sir.'

And he flitted out, leaving us to discuss details.

       *       *       *       *       *

Until we started this business of floating old Chiswick as a
money-making proposition I had never realized what a perfectly foul
time those Stock Exchange fellows must have when the public isn't
biting freely. Nowadays I read that bit they put in the financial
reports about 'The market opened quietly' with a sympathetic eye, for,
by Jove, it certainly opened quietly for us. You'd hardly believe how
difficult it was to interest the public and make them take a flutter on
the old boy. By the end of a week the only name we had on our list was
a delicatessen-store keeper down in Bicky's part of the town, and as he
wanted us to take it out in sliced ham instead of cash that didn't help
much. There was a gleam of light when the brother of Bicky's pawnbroker
offered ten dollars, money down, for an introduction to old Chiswick,
but the deal fell through, owing to its turning out that the chap was
an anarchist and intended to kick the old boy instead of shaking hands
with him. At that, it took me the deuce of a time to persuade Bicky not
to grab the cash and let things take their course. He seemed to regard
the pawnbroker's brother rather as a sportsman and benefactor of his
species than otherwise.

The whole thing, I'm inclined to think, would have been off if it
hadn't been for Jeeves. There is no doubt that Jeeves is in a class of
his own. In the matter of brain and resource I don't think I have ever
met a chappie so supremely like mother made. He trickled into my room
one morning with the good old cup of tea, and intimated that there was
something doing.

'Might I speak to you with regard to that matter of His Grace, sir?'

'It's all off. We've decided to chuck it.'

'Sir?'

'It won't work. We can't get anybody to come.'

'I fancy I can arrange that aspect of the matter, sir.'

'Do you mean to say you've managed to get anybody?'

'Yes, sir. Eighty-seven gentlemen from Birdsburg, sir.' I sat up in bed
and spilt the tea.

'Birdsburg?'

'Birdsburg, Missouri, sir.'

'How did you get them?'

'I happened last night, sir, as you had intimated that you would be
absent from home, to attend a theatrical performance, and entered
into conversation between the acts with the occupant of the adjoining
seat. I had observed that he was wearing a somewhat ornate decoration
in his buttonhole, sir--a large blue button with the words "Boost
for Birdsburg" upon it in red letters, scarcely a judicious addition
to a gentleman's evening costume. To my surprise I noticed that the
auditorium was full of persons similarly decorated. I ventured to
inquire the explanation, and was informed that these gentlemen, forming
a party of eighty-seven, are a convention from a town of the name
of Birdsburg in the State of Missouri. Their visit, I gathered, was
purely of a social and pleasurable nature, and my informant spoke at
some length of the entertainments arranged for their stay in the city.
It was when he related with a considerable amount of satisfaction and
pride that a deputation of their number had been introduced to and had
shaken hands with a well-known prize-fighter that it occurred to me
to broach the subject of His Grace. To make a long story short, sir,
I have arranged, subject to your approval, that the entire convention
shall be presented to His Grace tomorrow afternoon.'

I was amazed.

'Eighty-seven, Jeeves! At how much a head?'

'I was obliged to agree to a reduction for quantity, sir. The terms
finally arrived at were one hundred and fifty dollars for the party.'

I thought a bit.

'Payable in advance?'

'No, sir. I endeavoured to obtain payment in advance, but was not
successful.'

'Well, anyway, when we get it I'll make it up to five hundred. Bicky'll
never know. Do you suppose Mr Bickersteth would suspect anything,
Jeeves, if I made it up to five hundred?'

'I fancy not, sir. Mr Bickersteth is an agreeable gentleman, but not
bright.'

'All right, then. After breakfast run down to the bank and get me some
money.'

'Yes, sir.'

'You know, you're a bit of a marvel, Jeeves.'

'Thank you, sir.'

'Right-ho!'

'Very good, sir.'

When I took dear old Bicky aside in the course of the morning and
told him what had happened he nearly broke down. He tottered into the
sitting-room and buttonholed old Chiswick, who was reading the comic
section of the morning paper with a kind of grim resolution.

'Uncle,' he said, 'are you doing anything special tomorrow afternoon?
I mean to say, I've asked a few of my pals in to meet you, don't you
know.'

The old boy cocked a speculative eye at him.

'There will be no reporters among them?'

'Reporters? Rather not. Why?'

'I refuse to be badgered by reporters. There were a number of adhesive
young men who endeavoured to elicit from me my views on America while
the boat was approaching the dock. I will not be subjected to this
persecution again.'

'That'll be absolutely all right, uncle. There won't be a newspaper man
in the place.'

'In that case I shall be glad to make the acquaintance of your
friends.'

'You'll shake hands with them, and so forth?'

'I shall naturally order my behaviour according to the accepted rules
of civilized intercourse.'

Bicky thanked him heartily and came off to lunch with me at the club,
where he babbled freely of hens, incubators, and other rotten things.

       *       *       *       *       *

After mature consideration we had decided to unleash the Birdsburg
contingent on the old boy ten at a time. Jeeves brought his theatre
pal round to see us, and we arranged the whole thing with him. A very
decent chappie, but rather inclined to collar the conversation and
turn it in the direction of his home-town's new water-supply system.
We settled that, as an hour was about all he would be likely to stand,
each gang should consider itself entitled to seven minutes of the
duke's society by Jeeves's stop-watch, and that when their time was up
Jeeves should slide into the room and cough meaningly. Then we parted
with what I believe are called mutual expressions of goodwill, the
Birdsburg chappie extending a cordial invitation to us all to pop out
some day and take a look at the new water-supply system, for which we
thanked him.

Next day the deputation rolled in. The first shift consisted of the
cove we had met and nine others almost exactly like him in every
respect. They all looked deuced keen and business-like, as if from
youth up they had been working in the office and catching the boss's
eye and what-not. They shook hands with the old boy with a good deal
of apparent satisfaction--all except one chappie, who seemed to be
brooding about something--and then they stood off and became chatty.

'What message have you for Birdsburg, duke?' asked our pal.

The old boy seemed a bit rattled.

'I have never been to Birdsburg.'

The chappie seemed pained.

'You should pay it a visit,' he said. 'The most rapidly growing city in
the country. Boost for Birdsburg!'

'Boost for Birdsburg!' said the other chappies reverently.

The chappie who had been brooding suddenly gave tongue.

'Say!'

He was a stout sort of well-fed cove with one of those determined chins
and a cold eye.

The assemblage looked at him.

'As a matter of business,' said the chappie--'mind you, I'm not
questioning anybody's good faith, but, as a matter of strict
business--I think this gentleman here ought to put himself on record
before witnesses as stating that he really is a duke.'

'What do you mean, sir?' cried the old boy, getting purple.

'No offence, simply business. I'm not saying anything, mind you, but
there's one thing that seems kind of funny to me. This gentleman here
says his name's Mr Bickersteth, as I understand it. Well, if you're the
Duke of Chiswick, why isn't he Lord Percy Something? I've read English
novels, and I know all about it.'

'This is monstrous!'

'Now don't get hot under the collar. I'm only asking. I've a right to
know. You're going to take our money, so it's only fair that we should
see that we get our money's worth.'

The water-supply cove chipped in:

'You're quite right, Simms. I overlooked that when making the
agreement. You see, gentlemen, as business men we've a right to
reasonable guarantees of good faith. We are paying Mr Bickersteth here
a hundred and fifty dollars for this reception, and we naturally want
to know--'

Old Chiswick gave Bicky a searching look; then he turned to the
water-supply chappie. He was frightfully calm.

'I can assure you that I know nothing of this,' he said quite politely.
'I should be grateful if you would explain.'

'Well, we arranged with Mr Bickersteth that eighty-seven citizens
of Birdsburg should have the privilege of meeting and shaking hands
with you for a financial consideration mutually arranged, and what my
friend Simms here means--and I'm with him--is that we have only Mr
Bickersteth's word for it--and he is a stranger to us--that you are the
Duke of Chiswick at all.'

Old Chiswick gulped.

'Allow me to assure you, sir,' he said in a rummy kind of voice, 'that
I am the Duke of Chiswick.'

'Then that's all right,' said the chappie heartily. 'That was all we
wanted to know. Let the thing go on.'

'I am sorry to say,' said old Chiswick, 'that it cannot go on. I am
feeling a little tired. I fear I must ask to be excused.'

'But there are seventy-seven of the boys waiting round the corner at
this moment, duke, to be introduced to you.'

'I fear I must disappoint them.'

'But in that case the deal would have to be off.'

'That is a matter for you and my nephew to discuss.'

The chappie seemed troubled.

'You really won't meet the rest of them?'

'No!'

'Well, then, I guess we'll be going.'

They went out, and there was a pretty solid silence. Then old Chiswick
turned to Bicky:

'Well?'

Bicky didn't seem to have anything to say.

'Was it true what that man said?'

'Yes, uncle.'

'What do you mean by playing this trick?'

Bicky seemed pretty well knocked out, so I put in a word: 'I think
you'd better explain the whole thing, Bicky, old top.'

Bicky's adam's apple jumped about a bit; then he started.

'You see, you had cut off my allowance, uncle, and I wanted a bit of
money to start a chicken farm. I mean to say it's an absolute cert if
you once get a bit of capital. You buy a hen, and it lays an egg every
day of the week, and you sell the egg, say, seven for twenty-five
cents. Keep of hen costs nothing. Profit practically--'

'What is all this nonsense about hens? You led me to suppose you were a
substantial business man.'

'Old Bicky rather exaggerated, sir,' I said, helping the chappie
out. 'The fact is, the poor old lad is absolutely dependent on that
remittance of yours, and when you cut it off, don't you know, he was
pretty solidly in the soup, and had to think of some way of closing
in on a bit of the ready pretty quick. That's why we thought of this
hand-shaking scheme.'

Old Chiswick foamed at the mouth.

'So you have lied to me! You have deliberately deceived me as to your
financial status!'

'Poor old Bicky didn't want to go to that ranch,' I explained. 'He
doesn't like cows and horses, but he rather thinks he would be hot
stuff among the hens. All he wants is a bit of capital. Don't you think
it would be rather a wheeze if you were to--'

'After what has happened? After this--this deceit and foolery? Not a
penny!'

'But--'

'Not a penny!'

There was a respectful cough in the background.

'If I might make a suggestion, sir?'

Jeeves was standing on the horizon, looking devilish brainy.

'Go ahead, Jeeves!' I said.

'I would merely suggest, sir, that if Mr Bickersteth is in need of
a little ready money, and is at a loss to obtain it elsewhere he
might secure the sum he requires by describing the occurrences of
this afternoon for the Sunday issue of one of the more spirited and
enterprising newspapers.'

'By Jove!' I said.

'By George!' said Bicky.

'Great heavens!' said old Chiswick.

'Very good, sir,' said Jeeves.

Bicky turned to old Chiswick with a gleaming eye.

'Jeeves is right! I'll do it! The _Chronicle_ would jump at it. They
eat that sort of stuff.'

Old Chiswick gave a kind of moaning howl.

'I absolutely forbid you, Francis, to do this thing!'

'That's all very well,' said Bicky, wonderfully braced, 'but if I can't
get the money any other way--'

'Wait! Er--wait, my boy! You are so impetuous! We might arrange
something.'

'I won't go to that bally ranch.'

'No, no! No, no, my boy! I would not suggest it. I would not for a
moment suggest it. I--I think--' He seemed to have a bit of a struggle
with himself. 'I--I think that, on the whole it would be best if you
returned with me to England. I--I might--in fact, I think I see my
way to doing--to--I might be able to utilize your services in some
secretarial position.'

'I shouldn't mind that.'

'I should not be able to offer you a salary, but, as you know, in
English political life the unpaid secretary is a recognized figure--'

'The only figure I'll recognize,' said Bicky firmly, 'is five hundred
quid a year, paid quarterly.'

'My dear boy!'

'Absolutely!'

'But your recompense, my dear Francis, would consist in the unrivalled
opportunities you would have, as my secretary, to gain experience, to
accustom yourself to the intricacies of political life, to--in fact,
you would be in an exceedingly advantageous position.'

'Five hundred a year!' said Bicky, rolling it round his tongue. 'Why,
that would be nothing to what I could make if I started a chicken farm.
It stands to reason. Suppose you have a dozen hens. Each of the hens
has a dozen chickens. After a bit the chickens grow up and have a dozen
chickens each themselves, and then they all start laying eggs! There's
a fortune in it. You can get anything you like for eggs in America.
Fellows keep them on ice for years and years, and don't sell them
till they fetch about a dollar a whirl. You don't think I'm going to
chuck a future like this for anything under five hundred o' goblins a
year--what?'

A look of anguish passed over old Chiswick's face, then he seemed to be
resigned to it. 'Very well, my boy,' he said.

'What ho!' said Bicky. 'All right, then.'

       *       *       *       *       *

'Jeeves,' I said. Bicky had taken the old boy off to dinner to
celebrate, and we were alone. 'Jeeves, this has been one of your best
efforts.'

'Thank you, sir.'

'It beats me how you do it.'

'Yes, sir?'

'The only trouble is you haven't got much out of it yourself.'

'I fancy Mr Bickersteth intends--I judge from his remarks--to signify
his appreciation of anything I have been fortunate enough to do to
assist him, at some later date when he is in a more favourable position
to do so.'

'It isn't enough, Jeeves!'

'Sir?'

It was a wrench, but I felt it was the only possible thing to be done.

'Bring my shaving things.'

A gleam of hope shone in the man's eye, mixed with doubt.

'You mean, sir?'

'And shave off my moustache.'

There was a moment's silence. I could see the fellow was deeply moved.

'Thank you very much indeed, sir,' he said, in a low voice.




                     5--The Aunt and the Sluggard


Now that it's all over, I may as well admit that there was a time
during the affair of Rockmetteller Todd when I thought that Jeeves was
going to let me down. Silly of me, of course, knowing him as I do, but
that is what I thought. It seemed to me that the man had the appearance
of being baffled.

The Rocky Todd business broke loose early one morning in spring. I
was in bed, restoring the physique with my usual nine hours of the
dreamless, when the door flew open and somebody prodded me in the lower
ribs and began to shake the bedclothes in an unpleasant manner. And
after blinking a bit and generally pulling myself together, I located
Rocky, and my first impression was that it must be some horrid dream.

Rocky, you see, lived down on Long Island somewhere, miles away from
New York; and not only that, but he had told me himself more than
once that he never got up before twelve, and seldom earlier than one.
Constitutionally the laziest young devil in America, he had hit on a
walk in life which enabled him to go the limit in that direction. He
was a poet. At least, he wrote poems when he did anything; but most of
his time, as far as I could make out, he spent in a sort of trance.
He told me once that he could sit on a fence, watching a worm and
wondering what on earth it was up to for hours at a stretch.

He had his scheme of life worked out to a fine point. About once a
month he would take three days writing a few poems; the other three
hundred and twenty-nine days of the year he rested. I didn't know there
was enough money in poetry to support a chappie, even in the way in
which Rocky lived; but it seems that, if you stick to exhortations to
young men to lead the strenuous life and don't shove in any rhymes,
American editors fight for the stuff. Rocky showed me one of his things
once. It began:

    Be!
    Be!
      The past is dead,
      Tomorrow is not born.
      Be today!
    Today!
      Be with every nerve,
      With every fibre,
      With every drop of your red blood!
    Be!
    Be!

There were three more verses, and the thing was printed opposite the
frontispiece of a magazine with a sort of scroll round it, and a
picture in the middle of a fairly nude chappie with bulging muscles
giving the rising sun the glad eye. Rocky said they gave him a hundred
dollars for it, and he stayed in bed till four in the afternoon for
over a month.

As regarded the future he was pretty solid, owing to the fact that he
had a moneyed aunt tucked away somewhere in Illinois. It's a curious
thing how many of my pals seem to have aunts and uncles who are their
main source of supply. There is Bicky for one, with his uncle the Duke
of Chiswick; Corky, who, until things went wrong, looked to Alexander
Worple, the bird specialist, for sustenance. And I shall be telling
you a story shortly of a dear old friend of mine, Oliver Sipperley,
who had an aunt in Yorkshire. These things cannot be mere coincidence.
They must be meant. What I'm driving at is that Providence seems to
look after the chumps of this world; and, personally, I'm all for it. I
suppose the fact is that, having been snootered from infancy upwards by
my own aunts, I like to see that it is possible for these relatives to
have a better and a softer side.

However, this is more or less of a side-track. Coming back to Rocky,
what I was saying was that he had this aunt in Illinois; and, as he had
been named Rockmetteller after her (which in itself, you might say,
entitled him to substantial compensation) and was her only nephew, his
position looked pretty sound. He told me that when he did come into the
money he meant to do no work at all, except perhaps an occasional poem
recommending the young man with life opening out before him with all
its splendid possibilities to light a pipe and shove his feet up on the
mantelpiece.

And this was the man who was prodding me in the ribs in the grey dawn!

'Read this, Bertie!' babbled old Rocky.

I could just see that he was waving a letter or something equally foul
in my face. 'Wake up and read this!'

I can't read before I've had my morning tea and a cigarette. I groped
for the bell.

Jeeves came in, looking as fresh as a dewy violet. It's a mystery to me
how he does it.

'Tea, Jeeves.'

'Very good, sir.'

I found that Rocky was surging round with his beastly letter again.

'What is it?' I said. 'What on earth's the matter?'

'Read it!'

'I can't. I haven't had my tea.'

'Well, listen then.'

'Who's it from?'

'My aunt.'

At this point I fell asleep again. I woke to hear him saying:

'So what on earth am I to do?'

Jeeves flowed in with the tray, like some silent stream meandering over
its mossy bed; and I saw daylight.

'Read it again, Rocky, old top,' I said. 'I want Jeeves to hear it. Mr
Todd's aunt has written him a rather rummy letter, Jeeves, and we want
your advice.'

'Very good, sir.'

He stood in the middle of the room, registering devotion to the cause,
and Rocky started again:

    'My dear Rockmetteller,

    'I have been thinking things over for a long while, and I have come
    to the conclusion that I have been very thoughtless to wait so long
    before doing what I am made up my mind to do now.'

'What do you make of that, Jeeves?'

'It seems a little obscure at present, sir, but no doubt it becomes
clearer at a later point in the communication.'

'Proceed, old scout,' I said, champing my bread and butter.

    'You know how all my life I have longed to visit New York and see
    for myself the wonderful gay life of which I have read so much. I
    fear that now it will be impossible for me to fulfil my dream. I
    am old and worn out. I seem to have no strength left in me.'

'Sad, Jeeves, what?'

'Extremely, sir.'

'Sad nothing!' said Rocky. 'It's sheer laziness. I went to see her last
Christmas and she was bursting with health. Her doctor told me himself
that there was nothing wrong with her whatever. But she will insist
that she's a hopeless invalid, so he has to agree with her. She's got
a fixed idea that the trip to New York would kill her; so, though it's
been her ambition all her life to come here, she stays where she is.'

'Rather like the chappie whose heart, was "in the Highlands a-chasing
of the deer", Jeeves?'

'The cases are in some respects parallel, sir.'

'Carry on, Rocky, dear boy.'

    'So I have decided that, if I cannot enjoy all the marvels of the
    city myself, I can at least enjoy them through you. I suddenly
    thought of this yesterday after reading a beautiful poem in the
    Sunday paper about a young man who had longed all his life for a
    certain thing and won it in the end only when he was too old to
    enjoy it. It was very sad, and it touched me.'

'A thing,' interpolated Rocky bitterly, 'that I've not been able to do
in ten years.'

    'As you know, you will have my money when I am gone; but until now
    I have never been able to see my way to giving you an allowance. I
    have now decided to do so--on one condition. I have written to a
    firm of lawyers in New York, giving them instructions to pay you
    quite a substantial sum each month. My one condition is that you
    live in New York and enjoy yourself as I have always wished to do.
    I want you to be my representative, to spend this money for me as
    I should do myself. I want you to plunge into the gay, prismatic
    life of New York. I want you to be the life and soul of brilliant
    supper parties.

    'Above all, I want you--indeed, I insist on this--to write me
    letters at least once a week, giving me a full description of all
    you are doing and all that is going on in the city, so that I may
    enjoy at second-hand what my wretched health prevents my enjoying
    for myself. Remember that I shall expect full details, and that no
    detail is too trivial to interest.

                                                Your affectionate Aunt,

                                                 Isabel Rockmetteller.'

'What about it?' said Rocky.

'What about it?' I said.

'Yes. What on earth am I going to do?'

It was only then that I really got on to the extremely rummy attitude
of the chappie, in view of the fact that a quite unexpected mess of
good cash had suddenly descended on him from a blue sky. To my mind it
was an occasion for the beaming smile and the joyous whoop; yet here
the man was, looking and talking as if Fate had swung on his solar
plexus. It amazed me.

'Aren't you bucked?' I said.

'Bucked!'

'If I were in your place I should be frightfully braced. I consider
this pretty soft for you.'

He gave a kind of yelp, stared at me for a moment, and then began to
talk of New York in a way that reminded me of Jimmy Mundy, the reformer
bloke. Jimmy had just come to New York on a hit-the-trail campaign, and
I had popped in at Madison Square Garden a couple of days before, for
half an hour or so, to hear him. He had certainly told New York some
pretty straight things about itself, having apparently taken a dislike
to the place, but, by Jove, you know, dear old Rocky made him look like
a publicity agent for the old metrop!

'Pretty soft!' he cried. 'To have to come and live in New York! To have
to leave my little cottage and take a stuffy, smelly, over-heated hole
of an apartment in this Heaven-forsaken, festering Gehenna. To have
to mix night after night with a mob who think that life is a sort of
St Vitus's dance, and imagine that they're having a good time because
they're making enough noise for six and drinking too much for ten. I
loathe New York, Bertie. I wouldn't come near the place if I hadn't
got to see editors occasionally. There's a blight on it. It's got moral
delirium tremens. It's the limit. The very thought of staying more than
a day in it makes me sick. And you call this thing pretty soft for me!'

I felt rather like Lot's friends must have done when they dropped in
for a quiet chat and their genial host began to criticize the Cities of
the Plain. I had no idea old Rocky could be so eloquent.

'It would kill me to have to live in New York,' he went on. 'To have
to share the air with six million people! To have to wear stiff
collars and decent clothes all the time! To--' He started. 'Good Lord!
I suppose I should have to dress for dinner in the evenings. What a
ghastly notion!'

I was shocked, absolutely shocked.

'My dear chap!' I said, reproachfully.

'Do you dress for dinner every night, Bertie?'

'Jeeves,' I said coldly. 'How many suits of evening clothes have we?'

'We have three suits of full evening dress, sir; two dinner jackets--'

'Three.'

'For practical purposes two only, sir. If you remember, we cannot wear
the third. We have also seven white waistcoats.'

'And shirts?'

'Four dozen, sir.'

'And white ties?'

'The first two shallow shelves in the chest of drawers are completely
filled with our white ties, sir.'

I turned to Rocky.

'You see?'

The chappie writhed like an electric fan.

'I won't do it! I can't do it! I'll be hanged if I'll do it! How on
earth can I dress up like that? Do you realize that most days I don't
get out of my pyjamas till five in the afternoon, and then I just put
on an old sweater?'

I saw Jeeves wince, poor chap. This sort of revelation shocked his
finest feelings.

'Then, what are you going to do about it?' I said.

'That's what I want to know.'

'You might write and explain to your aunt.'

'I might--if I wanted her to get round to her lawyer's in two rapid
leaps and cut me out of her will.'

I saw his point.

'What do you suggest, Jeeves?' I said.

Jeeves cleared his throat respectfully.

'The crux of the matter would appear to be, sir, that Mr Todd is
obliged by the conditions under which the money is delivered into
his possession to write Miss Rockmetteller long and detailed letters
relating to his movements, and the only method by which this can
be accomplished, if Mr Todd adheres to his expressed intention of
remaining in the country, is for Mr Todd to induce some second party to
gather the actual experiences which Miss Rockmetteller wishes reported
to her, and to convey these to him in the shape of a careful report, on
which it would be possible for him, with the aid of his imagination, to
base the suggested correspondence.'

Having got which off the old diaphragm, Jeeves was silent. Rocky looked
at me in a helpless sort of way. He hasn't been brought up on Jeeves as
I have, and he isn't on to his curves.

'Could he put it a little clearer, Bertie?' he said. 'I thought at the
start it was going to make sense, but it kind of flickered. What's the
idea?'

'My dear old man, perfectly simple. I knew we could stand on Jeeves.
All you've got to do is to get somebody to go round the town for you
and take a few notes, and then you work the notes up into letters.
That's it, isn't it, Jeeves?'

'Precisely, sir.'

The light of hope gleamed in Rocky's eyes. He looked at Jeeves in a
startled way, dazed by the man's vast intellect.

'But who would do it?' he said. 'It would have to be a pretty smart
sort of man, a man who would notice things.'

'Jeeves!' I said. 'Let Jeeves do it.'

'But would he?'

'You would do it, wouldn't you, Jeeves?'

For the first time in our long connexion I observed Jeeves almost
smile. The corner of his mouth curved quite a quarter of an inch, and
for a moment his eye ceased to look like a meditative fish's.

'I should be delighted to oblige, sir. As a matter of fact, I have
already visited some of New York's places of interest on my evening
out, and it would be most enjoyable to make a practice of the pursuit.'

'Fine! I know exactly what your aunt wants to hear about, Rocky. She
wants an earful of cabaret stuff. The place you ought to go to first,
Jeeves, is Reigelheimer's. It's on Forty-second Street. Anybody will
show you the way.'

Jeeves shook his head.

'Pardon me, sir. People are no longer going to Reigelheimer's. The
place at the moment is Frolics on the Roof.'

'You see?' I said to Rocky. 'Leave it to Jeeves. He knows.'

       *       *       *       *       *

It isn't often that you find an entire group of your fellow-humans
happy in this world; but our little circle was certainly an example of
the fact that it can be done. We were all full of beans. Everything
went absolutely right from the start.

Jeeves was happy, partly because he loves to exercise his giant brain,
and partly because he was having a corking time among the bright
lights. I saw him one night at the Midnight Revels. He was sitting at a
table on the edge of the dancing floor, doing himself remarkably well
with a fat cigar. His face wore an expression of austere benevolence,
and he was making notes in a small book.

As for the rest of us, I was feeling pretty good, because I was fond
of old Rocky and glad to be able to do him a good turn. Rocky was
perfectly contented, because he was still able to sit on fences in his
pyjamas and watch worms. And, as for the aunt, she seemed tickled to
death. She was getting Broadway at pretty long range, but it seemed to
be hitting her just right. I read one of her letters to Rocky, and it
was full of life.

But then Rocky's letters, based on Jeeves's notes, were enough to
buck anybody up. It was rummy when you came to think of it. There was
I, loving the life, while the mere mention of it gave Rocky a tired
feeling; yet here is a letter I wrote home to a pal of mine in London:

    Dear Freddie,

    Well, here I am in New York. It's not a bad place. I'm not having a
    bad time. Everything's not bad. The cabarets aren't bad. Don't know
    when I shall be back. How's everybody? Cheerio!

                                                                 Yours,

                                                                Bertie.

    P.S.--Seen old Ted lately?

Not that I cared about old Ted; but if I hadn't dragged him in I
couldn't have got the confounded thing on to the second page.

Now here's old Rocky on exactly the same subject:

    Dearest Aunt Isabel,

    How can I ever thank you enough for giving me the opportunity to
    live in this astounding city! New York seems more wonderful every
    day.

    Fifth Avenue is at its best, of course, just now. The dresses are
    magnificent!

Wads of stuff about the dresses. I didn't know Jeeves was such an
authority.

    I was out with some of the crowd at the Midnight Revels the other
    night. We took in a show first, after a little dinner at a new place
    on Forty-third Street. We were quite a gay party. Georgie Cohan
    looked in about midnight and got off a good story about Willie
    Collier. Fred Stone could only stay a minute, but Doug. Fairbanks
    did all sorts of stunts and made us roar. Ed Wynn was there, and
    Laurette Taylor showed up with a party. The show at the Revels is
    quite good. I am enclosing a programme.

    Last night a few of us went round to Frolics on the Roof--

And so on and so forth, yards of it. I suppose it's the artistic
temperament or something. What I mean is, it's easier for a chappie
who's used to writing poems and that sort of tosh to put a bit of a
punch into a letter than it is for a fellow like me. Anyway, there's no
doubt that Rocky's correspondence was hot stuff. I called Jeeves in and
congratulated him.

'Jeeves, you're a wonder!'

'Thank you, sir.'

'How you notice everything at these places beats me. I couldn't tell
you a thing about them, except that I've had a good time.'

'It's just a knack, sir.'

'Well, Mr Todd's letters ought to brace Miss Rockmetteller all right,
what?'

'Undoubtedly, sir,' agreed Jeeves.

And, by Jove, they did! They certainly did, by George! What I mean to
say is, I was sitting in the apartment one afternoon, about a month
after the thing had started, smoking a cigarette and resting the old
bean, when the door opened and the voice of Jeeves burst the silence
like a bomb.

It wasn't that he spoke loud. He has one of those soft, soothing voices
that slide through the atmosphere like the note of a far-off sheep. It
was what he said that made me leap like a young gazelle.

'Miss Rockmetteller!'

And in came a large, solid female.

The situation floored me. I'm not denying it. Hamlet must have felt
much as I did when his father's ghost bobbed up in the fairway. I'd
come to look on Rocky's aunt as such a permanency at her own home that
it didn't seem possible that she could really be here in New York. I
stared at her. Then I looked at Jeeves. He was standing there in an
attitude of dignified detachment, the chump, when, if ever he should
have been rallying round the young master, it was now.

Rocky's aunt looked less like an invalid than anyone I've ever seen,
except my Aunt Agatha. She had a good deal of Aunt Agatha about her,
as a matter of fact. She looked as if she might be deucedly dangerous
if put upon; and something seemed to tell me that she would certainly
regard herself as put upon if she ever found out the game which poor
old Rocky had been pulling on her.

'Good afternoon,' I managed to say.

'How do you do?' she said. 'Mr Cohan?'

'Er--no.'

'Mr Fred Stone?'

'Not absolutely. As a matter of fact, my name's Wooster--Bertie
Wooster.'

She seemed disappointed. The fine old name of Wooster appeared to mean
nothing in her life.

'Isn't Rockmetteller home?' she said. 'Where is he?'

She had me with the first shot. I couldn't think of anything to say. I
couldn't tell her that Rocky was down in the country, watching worms.

There was the faintest flutter of sound in the background. It was the
respectful cough with which Jeeves announces that he is about to speak
without having been spoken to.

'If you remember, sir, Mr Todd went out in the automobile with a party
earlier in the afternoon.'

'So he did, Jeeves; so he did,' I said, looking at my watch. 'Did he
say when he would be back?'

'He gave me to understand, sir, that he would be somewhat late in
returning.'

He vanished; and the aunt took the chair which I'd forgotten to offer
her. She looked at me in rather a rummy way. It was a nasty look. It
made me feel as if I were something the dog had brought in and intended
to bury later on, when he had time. My own Aunt Agatha, back in
England, has looked at me in exactly the same way many a time, and it
never fails to make my spine curl.

'You seem very much at home here, young man. Are you a great friend of
Rockmetteller's?'

'Oh, yes, rather!'

She frowned as if she had expected better things of old Rocky.

'Well, you need to be,' she said, 'the way you treat his flat as your
own!'

I give you my word, this quite unforeseen slam simply robbed me of the
power of speech. I'd been looking on myself in the light of the dashing
host, and suddenly to be treated as an intruder jarred me. It wasn't,
mark you, as if she had spoken in a way to suggest that she considered
my presence in the place as an ordinary social call. She obviously
looked on me as a cross between a burglar and the plumber's man come to
fix the leak in the bathroom. It hurt her--my being there.

At this juncture, with the conversation showing every sign of being
about to die in awful agonies, an idea came to me. Tea--the good old
stand-by.

'Would you care for a cup of tea?' I said.

'Tea?'

She spoke as if she had never heard of the stuff.

'Nothing like a cup after a journey,' I said. 'Bucks you up! Puts a bit
of zip into you. What I mean is, restores you, and so on, don't you
know. I'll go and tell Jeeves.'

I tottered down the passage to Jeeves's lair. The man was reading the
evening paper as if he hadn't a care in the world.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'we want some tea.'

'Very good, sir.'

'I say, Jeeves, this is a bit thick, what?'

I wanted sympathy, don't you know--sympathy and kindness. The old nerve
centres had had the deuce of a shock.

'She's got the idea this place belongs to Mr Todd. What on earth put
that into her head?'

Jeeves filled the kettle with a restrained dignity.

'No doubt because of Mr Todd's letters, sir,' he said. 'It was my
suggestion, sir, if you remember, that they should be addressed from
this apartment in order that Mr Todd should appear to possess a good
central residence in the city.'

I remembered. We had thought it a brainy scheme at the time.

'Well, it's dashed awkward, you know, Jeeves. She looks on me as an
intruder. By Jove! I suppose she thinks I'm someone who hangs about
here, touching Mr Todd for free meals and borrowing his shirts.'

'Extremely probable, sir.'

'It's pretty rotten you know.'

'Most disturbing, sir.'

'And there's another thing: What are we to do about Mr Todd? We've got
to get him up here as soon as ever we can. When you have brought the
tea you had better go out and send him a telegram, telling him to come
up by the next train.'

'I have already done so, sir. I took the liberty of writing the message
and dispatching it by the lift attendant.'

'By Jove, you think of everything, Jeeves!'

'Thank you, sir. A little buttered toast with the tea? Just so, sir.
Thank you.'

I went back to the sitting-room. She hadn't moved an inch. She was
still bolt upright on the edge of her chair, gripping her umbrella like
a hammer-thrower. She gave me another of those looks as I came in.
There was no doubt about it; for some reason she had taken a dislike to
me. I suppose because I wasn't George M. Cohan. It was a bit hard on a
chap.

'This is a surprise, what?' I said, after about five minutes' restful
silence, trying to crank the conversation up again.

'What is a surprise?'

'Your coming here, don't you know, and so on.'

She raised her eyebrows and drank me in a bit more through her glasses.

'Why is it surprising that I should visit my only nephew?' she said.

'Oh, rather,' I said. 'Of course! Certainly. What I mean is--'

Jeeves projected himself into the room with the tea. I was jolly glad
to see him. There's nothing like having a bit of business arranged for
one when one isn't certain of one's lines. With the teapot to fool
about with I felt happier.

'Tea, tea, tea--what! What!' I said.

It wasn't what I had meant to say. My idea had been to be a good deal
more formal, and so on. Still, it covered the situation. I poured her
out a cup. She sipped it and put the cup down with a shudder.

'Do you mean to say, young man,' she said, frostily, 'that you expect
me to drink this stuff?'

'Rather! Bucks you up, you know.'

'What do you mean by the expression "Bucks you up"?'

'Well, makes you full of beans, you know. Makes you fizz.'

'I don't understand a word you say. You're English, aren't you?'

I admitted it. She didn't say a word. And she did it in a way that made
it worse than if she had spoken for hours. Somehow it was brought home
to me that she didn't like Englishmen, and that if she had had to meet
an Englishman I was the one she'd have chosen last.

Conversation languished once more after that.

Then I tried again. I was becoming more convinced every moment that you
can't make a real lively _salon_ with a couple of people, especially if
one of them lets it go a word at a time.

'Are you comfortable at your hotel?' I said.

'At which hotel?'

'The hotel you're staying at.'

'I am not staying at an hotel.'

'Stopping with friends--what?'

'I am naturally stopping with my nephew.'

I didn't get it for the moment; then it hit me.

'What! Here?' I gurgled.

'Certainly! Where else should I go?'

The full horror of the situation rolled over me like a wave. I couldn't
see what on earth I was to do. I couldn't explain that this wasn't
Rocky's flat without giving the poor old chap away hopelessly, because
she would then ask me where he did live, and then he would be right in
the soup. I was trying to recover from the shock when she spoke again.

'Will you kindly tell my nephew's manservant to prepare my room? I wish
to lie down.'

'Your nephew's manservant?'

'The man you call Jeeves. If Rockmetteller has gone for an automobile
ride there is no need for you to wait for him. He will naturally wish
to be alone with me when he returns.'

I found myself tottering out of the room. The thing was too much for
me. I crept into Jeeves's den.

'Jeeves!' I whispered.

'Sir?'

'Mix me a b-and-s, Jeeves. I feel weak.'

'Very good, sir.'

'This is getting thicker every minute, Jeeves.'

'Sir?'

'She thinks you're Mr Todd's man. She thinks the whole place is his,
and everything in it. I don't see what you're to do, except stay on and
keep it up. We can't say anything or she'll get on to the whole thing,
and I don't want to let Mr Todd down. By the way, Jeeves, she wants you
to prepare her bed.'

He looked wounded.

'It is hardly my place, sir--'

'I know--I know. But do it as a personal favour to me. If you come to
that, it's hardly my place to be flung out of the flat like this and
have to go to an hotel, what?'

'Is it your intention to go to an hotel, sir? What will you do for
clothes?'

'Good Lord! I hadn't thought of that. Can you put a few things in a bag
when she isn't looking, and sneak them down to me at the St Aurea?'

'I will endeavour to do so, sir.'

'Well, I don't think there's anything more, is there? Tell Mr Todd
where I am when he gets here.'

'Very good, sir.'

I looked round the place. The moment of parting had come. I felt sad.
The whole thing reminded me of one of those melodramas where they drive
chappies out of the old homestead into the snow.

'Good-bye, Jeeves,' I said.

'Good-bye, sir.'

And I staggered out.

You know, I rather think I agree with those poet-and-philosopher
Johnnies who insist that a fellow ought to be devilish pleased if
he has a bit of trouble. All that stuff about being refined by
suffering, you know. Suffering does give a chap a sort of broader and
more sympathetic outlook. It helps you to understand other people's
misfortunes if you've been through the same thing yourself.

As I stood in my lonely bedroom at the hotel, trying to tie my white
tie myself, it struck me for the first time that there must be whole
squads of chappies in the world who had to get along without a man to
look after them. I'd always thought of Jeeves as a kind of natural
phenomenon; but, by Jove! of course, when you come to think of it,
there must be quite a lot of fellows who have to press their own
clothes themselves, and haven't got anybody to bring them tea in the
morning, and so on. It was rather a solemn thought, don't you know. I
mean to say, ever since then I've been able to appreciate the frightful
privations the poor have to stick.

I got dressed somehow. Jeeves hadn't forgotten a thing in his packing.
Everything was there, down to the final stud. I'm not sure this didn't
make me feel worse. It kind of deepened the pathos. It was like what
somebody or other wrote about the touch of a vanished hand.

I had a bit of dinner somewhere and went to a show of some kind; but
nothing seemed to make any difference. I simply hadn't the heart to go
on to supper anywhere. I just went straight up to bed. I don't know
when I've felt so rotten. Somehow I found myself moving about the
room softly, as if there had been a death in the family. If I had had
anybody to talk to I should have talked in a whisper; in fact, when the
telephone-bell rang I answered in such a sad, hushed voice that the
fellow at the other end of the wire said 'Hallo!' five times, thinking
he hadn't got me.

It was Rocky. The poor old scout was deeply agitated.

'Bertie! Is that you, Bertie? Oh, gosh! I'm having a time!'

'Where are you speaking from?'

'The Midnight Revels. We've been here an hour, and I think we're a
fixture for the night. I've told Aunt Isabel I've gone out to call up
a friend to join us. She's glued to a chair, with this-is-the-life
written all over her, taking it in through the pores. She loves it, and
I'm nearly crazy.'

'Tell me all, old top,' I said.

'A little more of this,' he said, 'and I shall sneak quietly off to
the river and end it all. Do you mean to say you go through this sort
of thing every night, Bertie, and enjoy it? It's simply infernal! I
was just snatching a wink of sleep behind the bill of fare just now
when about a million yelling girls swooped down, with toy balloons.
There are two orchestras here, each trying to see if it can't play
louder than the other. I'm a mental and physical wreck. When your
telegram arrived I was just lying down for a quiet pipe, with a sense
of absolute peace stealing over me. I had to get dressed and sprint two
miles to catch the train. It nearly gave me heart-failure; and on top
of that I almost got brain fever inventing lies to tell Aunt Isabel.
And then I had to cram myself into these confounded evening clothes of
yours.'

I gave a sharp wail of agony. It hadn't struck me till then that Rocky
was depending on my wardrobe to see him through.

'You'll ruin them!'

'I hope so,' said Rocky in the most unpleasant way. His troubles seemed
to have had the worst effect on his character. 'I should like to get
back at them somehow; they've given me a bad enough time. They're about
three sizes too small, and something's apt to give at any moment. I
wish to goodness it would, and give me a chance to breathe. I haven't
breathed since half past seven. Thank heaven, Jeeves managed to get out
and buy me a collar that fitted, or I should be a strangled corpse
by now! It was touch and go till the stud broke. Bertie, this is pure
Hades! Aunt Isabel keeps on urging me to dance. How on earth can I
dance when I don't know a soul to dance with? And how the deuce could
I, even if I knew every girl in the place? It's taking big chances even
to move in these trousers. I had to tell her I've hurt my ankle. She
keeps asking me when Cohan and Stone are going to turn up; and it's
simply a question of time before she discovers that Stone is sitting
two tables away. Something's got to be done, Bertie! You've got to
think up some way of getting me out of this mess. It was you who got me
into it.'

'Me! What do you mean?'

'Well, Jeeves, then. It's all the same. It was you who suggested
leaving it to Jeeves. It was those letters I wrote from his notes that
did the mischief. I made them too good. My aunt's just been telling me
about it. She says she had resigned herself to ending her life where
she was, and then my letters began to arrive, describing the joys of
New York; and they stimulated her to such an extent that she pulled
herself together and made the trip. She seems to think she's had some
miraculous kind of faith cure. I tell you I can't stand it, Bertie!
It's got to end!'

'Can't Jeeves think of anything?'

'No. He just hangs round, saying: "Most disturbing, sir!" A fat lot of
help that is!'

'Well, old lad,' I said, 'after all, it's far worse for me than it is
for you. You've got a comfortable home and Jeeves. And you're saving a
lot of money.'

'Saving money? What do you mean--saving money?'

'Why, the allowance your aunt was giving you. I suppose she's paying
all the expenses now, isn't she?'

'Certainly she is: but she's stopped the allowance. She wrote the
lawyers tonight. She says that, now she's in New York, there is no
necessity for it to go on, as we shall always be together, and it's
simpler for her to look after that end of it. I tell you, Bertie, I've
examined the darned cloud with a microscope, and if it's got a silver
lining it's some little dissembler!'

'But, Rocky, old top, it's too bally awful! You've no notion of what
I'm going through in this beastly hotel, without Jeeves. I must get
back to the flat.'

'Don't come near the flat!'

'But it's my own flat.'

'I can't help that. Aunt Isabel doesn't like you. She asked me what you
did for a living. And when I told her you didn't do anything she said
she thought as much, and that you were a typical specimen of a useless
and decaying aristocracy. So if you think you have made a hit, forget
it. Now I must be going back, or she'll be coming out here after me.
Good-bye.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning Jeeves came round. It was all so home-like when he floated
noiselessly into the room that I nearly broke down.

'Good morning, sir,' he said. 'I have brought a few more of your
personal belongings.'

He began to unstrap the suit-case he was carrying.

'Did you have any trouble sneaking them away?'

'It was not easy, sir. I had to watch my chance. Miss Rockmetteller is
a remarkably alert lady.'

'You know, Jeeves, say what you like--this _is_ a bit thick, isn't it?'

'The situation is certainly one that has never before come under my
notice, sir. I have brought the heather-mixture suit, as the climatic
conditions are congenial. Tomorrow, if not prevented, I will endeavour
to add the brown lounge with the faint green twill.'

'It can't go on--this sort of thing--Jeeves.'

'We must hope for the best, sir.'

'Can't you think of anything to do?'

'I have been giving the matter considerable thought, sir, but so far
without success. I am placing three silk shirts--the dove-coloured, the
light blue, and the mauve--in the first long drawer, sir.'

'You don't mean to say you can't think of anything, Jeeves?'

'For the moment, sir, no. You will find a dozen handkerchiefs and the
tan socks in the upper drawer on the left.' He strapped the suit-case
and put it on a chair. 'A curious lady, Miss Rockmetteller, sir.'

'You understate it, Jeeves.'

He gazed meditatively out of the window.

'In many ways, sir, Miss Rockmetteller reminds me of an aunt of mine
who resides in the south-east portion of London. Their temperaments
are much alike. My aunt has the same taste for the pleasures of the
great city. It is a passion with her to ride in hansom cabs, sir.
Whenever the family take their eyes off her she escapes from the house
and spends the day riding about in cabs. On several occasions she has
broken into the children's savings bank to secure the means to enable
her to gratify this desire.'

'I love to have these little chats with you about your female
relatives, Jeeves,' I said coldly, for I felt that the man had let me
down, and I was fed up with him. 'But I don't see what all this has got
to do with my trouble.'

'I beg your pardon, sir. I am leaving a small assortment of our
neckties on the mantelpiece, sir, for you to select according to your
preference. I should recommend the blue with the red domino pattern,
sir.'

Then he streamed imperceptibly towards the door and flowed silently out.

       *       *       *       *       *

I've often heard that fellows after some great shock or loss have a
habit, after they've been on the floor for a while wondering what
hit them, of picking themselves up and piecing themselves together,
and sort of taking a whirl at beginning a new life. Time, the great
healer, and Nature adjusting itself and so on and so forth. There's a
lot in it. I know, because in my own case, after a day or two of what
you might call prostration, I began to recover. The frightful loss of
Jeeves made any thought of pleasure more or less a mockery, but at
least I found that I was able to have a dash at enjoying life again.
What I mean is, I braced up to the extent of going round the cabarets
once more, so as to try to forget, if only for the moment.

New York's a small place when it comes to the part of it that wakes up
just as the rest is going to bed, and it wasn't long before my tracks
began to cross old Rocky's. I saw him once at Peale's, and again at
Frolics on the Roof. There wasn't anybody with him either time except
the aunt, and, though he was trying to look as if he had struck the
ideal life, it wasn't difficult for me, knowing the circumstances, to
see that beneath the mask the poor chap was suffering. My heart bled
for the fellow. At least, what there was of it that wasn't bleeding for
myself bled for him. He had the air of one who was about to crack under
the strain.

It seemed to me that the aunt was looking slightly upset also. I took
it that she was beginning to wonder when the celebrities were going to
surge round, and what had suddenly become of all those wild, careless
spirits Rocky used to mix with in his letters. I didn't blame her. I
had only read a couple of his letters, but they certainly gave the
impression that poor old Rocky was by way of being the hub of New
York night life, and that, if by any chance he failed to show up at a
cabaret, the management said, 'What's the use?' and put up the shutters.

The next two nights I didn't come across them, but the night after
that I was sitting by myself at the Maison Pierre when somebody tapped
me on the shoulder-blade, and I found Rocky standing beside me, with
a sort of mixed expression of wistfulness and apoplexy on his face.
How the man had contrived to wear my evening clothes so many times
without disaster was a mystery to me. He confided later that early in
the proceedings he had slit the waistcoat up the back and that that had
helped a lot.

For a moment I had the idea that he had managed to get away from his
aunt for the evening; but, looking past him, I saw that she was in
again. She was at a table over by the wall, looking at me as if I were
something the management ought to be complained to about.

'Bertie, old scout,' said Rocky, in a quiet, sort of crushed voice,
'we've always been pals, haven't we? I mean, you know I'd do you a good
turn if you asked me.'

'My dear old lad,' I said. The man had moved me.

'Then, for Heaven's sake, come over and sit at our table for the rest
of the evening.'

Well, you know, there are limits to the sacred claims of friendship.

'My dear chap,' I said, 'you know I'd do anything in reason; but--'

'You must come, Bertie. You've got to. Something's got to be done to
divert her mind. She's brooding about something. She's been like that
for the last two days. I think she's beginning to suspect. She can't
understand why we never seem to meet anyone I know at these joints.
A few nights ago I happened to run into two newspaper men I used to
know fairly well. That kept me going for a while. I introduced them
to Aunt Isabel as David Belasco and Jim Corbett, and it went well.
But the effect has worn off now, and she's beginning to wonder again.
Something's got to be done, or she will find out everything, and if she
does I'd take a nickel for my chance of getting a cent from her later
on. So, for the love of Mike, come across to our table and help things
along.'

I went along. One has to rally round a pal in distress. Aunt Isabel
was sitting bolt upright, as usual. It certainly did seem as if she
had lost a bit of the zest with which she had started out to explore
Broadway. She looked as if she had been thinking a good deal about
rather unpleasant things.

'You've met Bertie Wooster, Aunt Isabel?' said Rocky.

'I have.'

'Take a seat, Bertie,' said Rocky.

And so the merry party began. It was one of those jolly, happy,
bread-crumbling parties where you cough twice before you speak, and
then decide not to say it after all. After we had had an hour of this
wild dissipation, Aunt Isabel said she wanted to go home. In the light
of what Rocky had been telling me, this struck me as sinister. I had
gathered that at the beginning of her visit she had had to be dragged
home with ropes.

It must have hit Rocky the same way, for he gave me a pleading look.

'You'll come along, won't you, Bertie, and have a drink at the flat?'

I had a feeling that this wasn't in the contract, but there wasn't
anything to be done. It seemed brutal to leave the poor chap alone with
the woman, so I went along.

Right from the start, from the moment we stepped into the taxi, the
feeling began to grow that something was about to break loose. A
massive silence prevailed in the corner where the aunt sat, and, though
Rocky, balancing himself on the little seat in front, did his best to
supply dialogue, we weren't a chatty party.

I had a glimpse of Jeeves as we went into the flat, sitting in his
lair, and I wished I could have called to him to rally round. Something
told me that I was about to need him.

The stuff was on the table in the sitting-room. Rocky took up the
decanter.

'Say when, Bertie.'

'Stop!' barked the aunt, and he dropped it.

I caught Rocky's eye as he stooped to pick up the ruins. It was the eye
of one who sees it coming.

'Leave it there, Rockmetteller!' said Aunt Isabel; and Rocky left it
there.

'The time has come to speak,' she said. 'I cannot stand idly by and see
a young man going to perdition!'

Poor old Rocky gave a sort of gurgle, a kind of sound rather like the
whisky had made running out of the decanter on to my carpet.

'Eh?' he said, blinking.

The aunt proceeded.

'The fault,' she said, 'was mine. I had not then seen the light. But
now my eyes are open. I see the hideous mistake I have made. I shudder
at the thought of the wrong I did you, Rockmetteller, by urging you
into contact with this wicked city.'

I saw Rocky grope feebly for the table. His fingers touched it, and
a look of relief came into the poor chappie's face. I understood his
feelings.

'But when I wrote you that letter, Rockmetteller, instructing you to go
to the city and live its life, I had not had the privilege of hearing
Mr Mundy speak on the subject of New York.'

'Jimmy Mundy!' I cried.

You know how it is sometimes when everything seems all mixed up and
you suddenly get a clue. When she mentioned Jimmy Mundy I began to
understand more or less what had happened. I'd seen it happen before. I
remember, back in England, the man I had before Jeeves sneaked off to a
meeting on his evening out and came back and denounced me in front of a
crowd of chappies I was giving a bit of supper to as a useless blot on
the fabric of Society.

The aunt gave me a withering up and down.

'Yes; Jimmy Mundy!' she said. 'I am surprised at a man of your stamp
having heard of him. There is no music, there are no drunken, dancing
men, no shameless, flaunting women at his meetings; so for you they
would have no attraction. But for others, less dead in sin, he has his
message. He has come to save New York from itself; to force it--in
his picturesque phrase--to hit the trail. It was three days ago,
Rockmetteller, that I first heard him. It was an accident that took me
to his meeting. How often in this life a mere accident may shape our
whole future!

'You had been called away by that telephone message from Mr Belasco;
so you could not take me to the Hippodrome, as we had arranged. I
asked your manservant, Jeeves, to take me there. The man has very
little intelligence. He seems to have misunderstood me. I am thankful
that he did. He took me to what I subsequently learned was Madison
Square Garden, where Mr Mundy is holding his meetings. He escorted me
to a seat and then left me. And it was not till the meeting had begun
that I discovered the mistake which had been made. My seat was in the
middle of a row. I could not leave without inconveniencing a great many
people, so I remained.'

She gulped.

'Rockmetteller, I have never been so thankful for anything else. Mr
Mundy was wonderful! He was like some prophet of old, scouring the
sins of the people. He leaped about in a frenzy of inspiration till I
feared he would do himself an injury. Sometimes he expressed himself in
a somewhat odd manner, but every word carried conviction. He showed me
New York in its true colours. He showed me the vanity and wickedness
of sitting in gilded haunts of vice, eating lobster when decent people
should be in bed.

'He said that the tango and the fox-trot were devices of the devil
to drag people down into the Bottomless Pit. He said that there was
more sin in ten minutes with a negro banjo orchestra than in all the
ancient revels of Nineveh and Babylon. And when he stood on one leg
and pointed right at where I was sitting and shouted "This means you!"
I could have sunk through the floor. I came away a changed woman.
Surely you must have noticed the change in me, Rockmetteller? You must
have seen that I was no longer the careless, thoughtless person who had
urged you to dance in those places of wickedness?'

Rocky was holding on to the table as if it was his only friend.

'Yes,' he stammered; 'I--I thought something was wrong.'

'Wrong? Something was right! Everything was right! Rockmetteller, it
is not too late for you to be saved. You have only sipped of the evil
cup. You have not drained it. It will be hard at first, but you will
find that you can do it if you fight with a stout heart against the
glamour and fascination of this dreadful city. Won't you, for my sake,
try, Rockmetteller? Won't you go to the country tomorrow and begin the
struggle? Little by little, if you use your will--'

I can't help thinking it must have been that word 'will' that roused
dear old Rocky like a trumpet call. It must have brought home to him
the realization that a miracle had come off and saved him from being
cut out of Aunt Isabel's. At any rate, as she said it he perked up, let
go of the table, and faced her with gleaming eyes.

'Do you want me to go to the country, Aunt Isabel?'

'Yes.'

'To live in the country?'

'Yes, Rockmetteller.'

'Stay in the country all the time? Never come to New York?'

'Yes, Rockmetteller; I mean just that. It is the only way. Only there
can you be safe from temptation. Will you do it, Rockmetteller? Will
you--for my sake?'

Rocky grabbed the table again. He seemed to draw a lot of encouragement
from that table.

'I will!' he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Jeeves,' I said. It was next day, and I was back in the old flat,
lying in the old arm-chair, with my feet upon the good old table. I had
just come from seeing dear old Rocky off to his country cottage, and an
hour before he had seen his aunt off to whatever hamlet it was that she
was the curse of; so we were alone at last. 'Jeeves, there's no place
like home--what?'

'Very true, sir.'

'The jolly old roof-tree, and all that sort of thing--what?'

'Precisely, sir.'

I lit another cigarette.

'Jeeves.'

'Sir?'

'Do you know, at one point in the business I really thought you were
baffled.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'When did you get the idea of taking Miss Rockmetteller to the meeting?
It was pure genius!'

'Thank you, sir. It came to me a little suddenly, one morning when I
was thinking of my aunt, sir.'

'Your aunt? The hansom cab one?'

'Yes, sir. I recollected that, whenever we observed one of her attacks
coming on, we used to send for the clergyman of the parish. We always
found that if he talked to her a while of higher things it diverted her
mind from hansom cabs. It occurred to me that the same treatment might
prove efficacious in the case of Miss Rockmetteller.'

I was stunned by the man's resource.

'It's brain,' I said; 'pure brain! What do you do to get like that,
Jeeves? I believe you must eat a lot of fish, or something. Do you eat
a lot of fish, Jeeves?'

'No, sir.'

'Oh, well, then, it's just a gift, I take it; and if you aren't born
that way there's no use worrying.'

'Precisely, sir,' said Jeeves. 'If I might make the suggestion, sir, I
should not continue to wear your present tie. The green shade gives you
a slightly bilious air. I should strongly advocate the blue with the
red domino pattern instead, sir.'

'All right, Jeeves,' I said humbly. 'You know!'




                   6--The Rummy Affair of Old Biffy


'Jeeves,' I said, emerging from the old tub, 'rally round.'

'Yes, sir.'

I beamed on the man with no little geniality. I was putting in a week
or two in Paris at the moment, and there's something about Paris that
always makes me feel fairly full of _espièglerie_ and _joie de vivre_.

'Lay out our gent's medium-smart raiment, suitable for Bohemian
revels,' I said. 'I am lunching with an artist bloke on the other side
of the river.'

'Very good, sir.'

'And if anybody calls for me, Jeeves, say that I shall be back towards
the quiet evenfall.'

'Yes, sir. Mr Biffen rang up on the telephone while you were in your
bath.'

'Mr Biffen? Good heavens!'

Amazing how one's always running across fellows in foreign
cities--coves, I mean, whom you haven't seen for ages and would have
betted weren't anywhere in the neighbourhood. Paris was the last place
where I should have expected to find old Biffy popping up. There was
a time when he and I had been lads about town together, lunching and
dining together practically every day; but some eighteen months back
his old godmother had died and left him that place in Herefordshire,
and he had retired there to wear gaiters and prod cows in the ribs and
generally be the country gentleman and landed proprietor. Since then I
had hardly seen him.

'Old Biffy in Paris? What's he doing here?'

'He did not confide in me, sir,' said Jeeves--a trifle frostily, I
thought. It sounded somehow as if he didn't like Biffy. And yet they
had always been matey enough in the old days.

'Where's he staying?'

'At the Hotel Avenida, Rue du Colisée, sir. He informed me that he was
about to take a walk and would call this afternoon.'

'Well, if he comes when I'm out, tell him to wait. And now, Jeeves,
_mes gants, mon chapeau, et le whangee de monsieur_. I must be popping.'

It was such a corking day and I had so much time in hand that near the
Sorbonne I stopped my cab, deciding to walk the rest of the way. And
I had hardly gone three steps and a half when there on the pavement
before me stood old Biffy in person. If I had completed the last step I
should have rammed him.

'Biffy!' I cried. 'Well, well, well!'

He peered at me in a blinking kind of way, rather like one of his
Herefordshire cows prodded unexpectedly while lunching.

'Bertie!' he gurgled, in a devout sort of tone. 'Thank God!' He
clutched my arm. 'Don't leave me, Bertie. I'm lost.'

'What do you mean, lost?'

'I came out for a walk and suddenly discovered after a mile or two
that I didn't know where on earth I was. I've been wandering round in
circles for hours.'

'Why didn't you ask the way?'

'I can't speak a word of French.'

'Well, why didn't you call a taxi?'

'I suddenly discovered I'd left all my money at my hotel.'

'You could have taken a cab and paid it when you got to the hotel.'

'Yes, but I suddenly discovered, dash it, that I'd forgotten its name.'

And there in a nutshell you have Charles Edward Biffen. As vague and
woollen-headed a blighter as ever bit a sandwich. Goodness knows--and
my Aunt Agatha will bear me out in this--I'm no master-mind myself but
compared with Biffy I'm one of the great thinkers of all time.

'I'd give a shilling,' said Biffy wistfully, 'to know the name of that
hotel.'

'You can owe it me. Hotel Avenida, Rue du Colisée.'

'Bertie! This is uncanny. How the deuce did you know?'

'That was the address you left with Jeeves this morning.'

'So it was. I had forgotten.'

'Well, come along and have a drink and then I'll put you in a cab and
send you home. I'm engaged for lunch, but I've plenty of time.'

We drifted to one of the eleven cafés which jostled each other along
the street and I ordered restoratives.

'What on earth are you doing in Paris?' I asked.

'Bertie, old man,' said Biffy solemnly, 'I came here to try and forget.'

'Well, you've certainly succeeded.'

'You don't understand. The fact is, Bertie, old lad, my heart is
broken. I'll tell you the whole story.'

'No, I say!' I protested. But he was off.

'Last year,' said Biffy, 'I buzzed over to Canada to do a bit of salmon
fishing.'

I ordered another. If this was going to be a fish-story, I needed
stimulants.

'On the liner going to New York I met a girl.' Biffy made a sort of
curious gulping noise not unlike a bulldog trying to swallow half a
cutlet in a hurry so as to be ready for the other half. 'Bertie, old
man, I can't describe her. I simply can't describe her.'

This was all to the good.

'She was wonderful! We used to walk on the boat-deck after dinner. She
was on the stage. At least, sort of.'

'How do you mean, sort of?'

'Well, she had posed for artists and been a mannequin in a big
dressmaker's and all that sort of thing, don't you know. Anyway, she
had saved up a few pounds and was on her way to see if she could get
a job in New York. She told me all about herself. Her father ran a
milk-walk in Clapham. Or it may have been Cricklewood. At least, it was
either a milk-walk or a boot-shop.'

'Easily confused.'

'What I'm trying to make you understand,' said Biffy, 'is that she came
of good, sturdy, respectable middle-class stock. Nothing flashy about
her. The sort of wife any man might have been proud of.'

'Well, whose wife was she?'

'Nobody's. That's the whole point of the story. I wanted her to be
mine, and I lost her.'

'Had a quarrel, you mean?'

'No, I don't mean we had a quarrel. I mean I literally lost her. The
last I ever saw of her was in the Customs sheds at New York. We were
behind a pile of trunks, and I had just asked her to be my wife, and
she had just said she would and everything was perfectly splendid, when
a most offensive blighter in a peaked cap came up to talk about some
cigarettes which he had found at the bottom of my trunk and which I had
forgotten to declare. It was getting pretty late by then, for we hadn't
docked till about ten-thirty, so I told Mabel to go on to her hotel and
I would come round next day and take her to lunch. And since then I
haven't set eyes on her.'

'You mean she wasn't at the hotel?'

'Probably she was. But--'

'You don't mean you never turned up?'

'Bertie, old man,' said Biffy, in an overwrought kind of way, 'for
Heaven's sake don't keep trying to tell me what I mean and what I don't
mean! Let me tell this my own way, or I shall get all mixed up and have
to go back to the beginning.'

'Tell it your own way,' I said hastily.

'Well, then, to put it in a word, Bertie, I forgot the name of the
hotel. By the time I'd done half an hour's heavy explaining about those
cigarettes my mind was a blank. I had an idea I had written the name
down somewhere, but I couldn't have done, for it wasn't on any of the
papers in my pocket. No, it was no good. She was gone.'

'Why didn't you make inquiries?'

'Well, the fact is, Bertie, I had forgotten her name.'

'Oh, no, dash it!' I said. This seemed a bit too thick even for Biffy.
'How could you forget her name? Besides, you told it me a moment ago.
Muriel or something.'

'Mabel,' corrected Biffy coldly. 'It was her surname I'd forgotten. So
I gave it up and went to Canada.'

'But half a second,' I said. 'You must have told her your name. I mean,
if you couldn't trace her, she could trace you.'

'Exactly. That's what makes it all seem so infernally hopeless. She
knows my name and where I live and everything, but I haven't heard a
word from her. I suppose, when I didn't turn up at the hotel, she took
it that that was my way of hinting delicately that I had changed my
mind and wanted to call the thing off.'

'I suppose so,' I said. There didn't seem anything else to suppose.
'Well, the only thing to do is to whizz around and try to heal the
wound, what? How about dinner tonight, winding up at the Abbaye or one
of those places?'

Biffy shook his head.

'It wouldn't be any good. I've tried it. Besides, I'm leaving on the
four o'clock train. I have a dinner engagement tomorrow with a man
who's nibbling at that house of mine in Herefordshire.'

'Oh, are you trying to sell that place? I thought you liked it.'

'I did. But the idea of going on living in that great, lonely barn of a
house after what has happened appals me, Bertie. So when Sir Roderick
Glossop came along--'

'Sir Roderick Glossop! You don't mean the loony-doctor?'

'The great nerve specialist, yes. Why, do you know him?'

It was a warm day, but I shivered.

'I was engaged to his daughter for a week or two,' I said, in a hushed
voice. The memory of that narrow squeak always made me feel faint.

'Has he a daughter?' said Biffy absently.

'He has. Let me tell you all about--'

'Not just now, old man,' said Biffy, getting up. 'I ought to be going
back to my hotel to see about my packing.'

Which, after I had listened to his story, struck me as pretty low-down.
However, the longer you live, the more you realize that the good old
sporting spirit of give-and-take has practically died out in our midst.
So I boosted him into a cab and went off to lunch.

       *       *       *       *       *

It can't have been more than ten days after this that I received a
nasty shock while getting outside my morning tea and toast. The English
papers had arrived, and Jeeves was just drifting out of the room after
depositing _The Times_ by my bedside, when, as I idly turned the pages
in search of the sporting section, a paragraph leaped out and hit me
squarely in the eyeball.

As follows:--

                         FORTHCOMING MARRIAGES

                   MR C. E. BIFFEN AND MISS GLOSSOP

    The engagement is announced between Charles Edward, only son of
    the late Mr E. C. Biffen, and Mrs Biffen, of 11 Penslow Square,
    Mayfair, and Honoria Jane Louise, only daughter of Sir Roderick
    and Lady Glossop, of 6b Harley Street, W.

'Great Scott!' I exclaimed.

'Sir?' said Jeeves, turning at the door.

'Jeeves, you remember Miss Glossop?'

'Very vividly, sir.'

'She's engaged to Mr Biffen!'

'Indeed, sir?' said Jeeves. And, with not another word, he slid out.
The blighter's calm amazed and shocked me. It seemed to indicate that
there must be a horrible streak of callousness in him. I mean to say,
it wasn't as if he didn't know Honoria Glossop.

I read the paragraph again. A peculiar feeling it gave me. I don't know
if you have ever experienced the sensation of seeing the announcement
of the engagement of a pal of yours to a girl whom you were only saved
from marrying yourself by the skin of your teeth. It induces a sort
of--well, it's difficult to describe it exactly; but I should imagine a
fellow would feel much the same if he happened to be strolling through
the jungle with a boyhood chum and met a tigress or a jaguar, or what
not, and managed to shin up a tree and looked down and saw the friend
of his youth vanishing into the undergrowth in the animal's slavering
jaws. A sort of profound, prayerful relief, if you know what I mean,
blended at the same time with a pang of pity. What I'm driving at is
that, thankful as I was that I hadn't had to marry Honoria myself, I
was sorry to see a real good chap like old Biffy copping it. I sucked
down a spot of tea and began to brood over the business.

Of course, there are probably fellows in the world--tough, hardy blokes
with strong chins and glittering eyes--who could get engaged to this
Glossop menace and like it, but I knew perfectly well that Biffy was
not one of them. Honoria, you see, is one of those robust, dynamic
girls with the muscles of a welterweight and a laugh like a squadron
of cavalry charging over a tin bridge. A beastly thing to have to
face over the breakfast table. Brainy, moreover. The sort of girl who
reduces you to pulp with sixteen sets of tennis and a few rounds of
golf and then comes down to dinner as fresh as a daisy, expecting you
to take an intelligent interest in Freud. If I had been engaged to her
another week, her old father would have had one more patient on his
books; and Biffy is much the same quiet sort of peaceful, inoffensive
bird as me. I was shocked, I tell you, shocked.

And, as I was saying, the thing that shocked me most was Jeeves's
frightful lack of proper emotion. The man happening to float in at this
juncture, I gave him one more chance to show some human sympathy.

'You got the name correctly, didn't you, Jeeves?' I said. 'Mr Biffen is
going to marry Honoria Glossop, the daughter of the old boy with the
egg-like head and the eyebrows.'

'Yes, sir. Which suit would you wish me to lay out this morning?'

And this, mark you, from the man who, when I was engaged to the
Glossop, strained every fibre in his brain to extricate me. It beat me.
I couldn't understand it.

'The blue with the red twill,' I said coldly. My manner was marked, and
I meant him to see that he had disappointed me sorely.

About a week later I went back to London, and scarcely had I got
settled in the old flat when Biffy blew in. One glance was enough to
tell me that the poisoned wound had begun to fester. The man did not
look bright. No, there was no getting away from it, not bright. He had
that kind of stunned, glassy expression which I used to see on my own
face in the shaving-mirror during my brief engagement to the Glossop
pestilence. However, if you don't want to be one of the What is Wrong
With This Picture brigade, you must observe the conventions, so I shook
his hand as warmly as I could.

'Well, well, old man,' I said. 'Congratulations.'

'Thanks,' said Biffy wanly, and there was rather a weighty silence.

'Bertie,' said Biffy, after the silence had lasted about three minutes.

'Hallo?'

'Is it really true--?'

'What?'

'Oh, nothing,' said Biffy, and conversation languished again. After
about a minute and a half he came to the surface once more.

'Bertie.'

'Still here, old thing. What is it?'

'I say, Bertie, is it really true that you were once engaged to
Honoria?'

'It is.'

Biffy coughed.

'How did you get out--I mean, what was the nature of the tragedy that
prevented the marriage?'

'Jeeves worked it. He thought out the entire scheme.'

'I think, before I go,' said Biffy thoughtfully, 'I'll just step into
the kitchen and have a word with Jeeves.'

I felt that the situation called for complete candour.

'Biffy, old egg,' I said, 'as man to man, do you want to oil out of
this thing?'

'Bertie, old cork,' said Biffy earnestly, 'as one friend to another, I
do.'

'Then why the dickens did you ever get into it?'

'I don't know. Why did you?'

'I--well, it sort of happened.'

'And it sort of happened with me. You know how it is when your heart's
broken. A kind of lethargy comes over you. You get absent-minded and
cease to exercise proper precautions, and the first thing you know
you're for it. I don't know how it happened, old man, but there it is.
And what I want you to tell me is, what's the procedure?'

'You mean, how does a fellow edge out?'

'Exactly. I don't want to hurt anybody's feelings, Bertie, but I can't
go through with this thing. The shot is not on the board. For about a
day and a half I thought it might be all right, but now--You remember
that laugh of hers?'

'I do.'

'Well, there's that, and then all this business of never letting a
fellow alone--improving his mind and so forth--'

'I know. I know.'

'Very well, then. What do you recommend? What did you mean when you
said that Jeeves worked a scheme?'

'Well, you see, old Sir Roderick, who's a loony-doctor and nothing
but a loony-doctor, however much you may call him a nerve specialist,
discovered that there was a modicum of insanity in my family. Nothing
serious. Just one of my uncles. Used to keep rabbits in his bedroom.
And the old boy came to lunch here to give me the once-over, and Jeeves
arranged matters so that he went away firmly convinced that I was off
my onion.'

'I see,' said Biffy thoughtfully. 'The trouble is there isn't any
insanity in my family.'

'None?'

It seemed to me almost incredible that a fellow could be such a perfect
chump as dear old Biffy without a bit of assistance.

'Not a loony on the list,' he said gloomily. 'It's just like my luck.
The old boy's coming to lunch with me tomorrow, no doubt to test me as
he did you. And I never felt saner in my life.'

I thought for a moment. The idea of meeting Sir Roderick again gave me
a cold shivery feeling; but when there is a chance of helping a pal we
Woosters have no thought of self.

'Look here, Biffy,' I said, 'I'll tell you what. I'll roll up for that
lunch. It may easily happen that when he finds you are a pal of mine he
will forbid the banns right away and no more questions asked.'

'Something in that,' said Biffy, brightening. 'Awfully sporting of you,
Bertie.'

'Oh, not at all,' I said. 'And meanwhile I'll consult Jeeves. Put the
whole thing up to him and ask his advice. He's never failed me yet.'

Biffy pushed off, a good deal braced, and I went into the kitchen.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'I want your help once more. I've just been having a
painful interview with Mr Biffen.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'It's like this,' I said, and told him the whole thing.

It was rummy, but I could feel him freezing from the start. As a rule,
when I call Jeeves into conference on one of these little problems,
he's all sympathy and bright ideas; but not today.

'I fear, sir,' he said, when I had finished, 'it is hardly my place to
intervene in a private matter affecting--'

'Oh come!'

'No, sir. It would be taking a liberty.'

'Jeeves,' I said, tackling the blighter squarely, 'what have you got
against old Biffy?'

'I, sir?'

'Yes, you.'

'I assure you, sir!'

'Oh, well, if you don't want to chip in and save a fellow-creature, I
suppose I can't make you. But let me tell you this. I am now going back
to the sitting-room, and I am going to put in some very tense thinking.
You'll look pretty silly when I come and tell you that I've got Mr
Biffen out of the soup without your assistance. Extremely silly you'll
look.'

'Yes, sir. Shall I bring you a whisky-and-soda, sir?'

'No. Coffee! Strong and black. And if anybody wants to see me, tell 'em
that I'm busy and can't be disturbed.'

An hour later I rang the bell.

'Jeeves,' I said with hauteur.

'Yes, sir?'

'Kindly ring Mr Biffen up on the phone and say that Mr Wooster presents
his compliments and that he has got it.'

       *       *       *       *       *

I was feeling more than a little pleased with myself next morning
as I strolled round to Biffy's. As a rule the bright ideas you get
overnight have a trick of not seeming quite so frightfully fruity when
you examine them by the light of day; but this one looked as good at
breakfast as it had done before dinner. I examined it narrowly from
every angle, and I didn't see how it could fail.

A few days before, my Aunt Emily's son Harold had celebrated his sixth
birthday; and, being up against the necessity of weighing in with a
present of some kind, I had happened to see in a shop in the Strand a
rather sprightly little gadget, well calculated in my opinion to amuse
the child and endear him to one and all. It was a bunch of flowers in
a sort of holder ending in an ingenious bulb attachment which, when
pressed, shot about a pint and a half of pure spring water into the
face of anyone who was ass enough to sniff at it. It seemed to me just
the thing to please the growing mind of a kid of six, and I had rolled
round with it.

But when I got to the house I found Harold sitting in the midst of a
mass of gifts so luxurious and costly that I simply hadn't the crust to
contribute a thing that had set me back a mere elevenpence-ha'penny;
so with rare presence of mind--for we Woosters can think quick on
occasion--I wrenched my Uncle James's card off a toy aeroplane,
substituted my own, and trousered the squirt, which I took away with
me. It had been lying around in my flat ever since, and it seemed to me
that the time had come to send it into action.

'Well?' said Biffy anxiously, as I curveted into his sitting-room.

The poor old bird was looking pretty green about the gills. I
recognized the symptoms. I had felt much the same myself when waiting
for Sir Roderick to turn up and lunch with me. How the deuce people
who have anything wrong with their nerves can bring themselves to chat
with that man, I can't imagine; and yet he has the largest practice in
London. Scarcely a day passes without his having to sit on somebody's
head and ring for the attendant to bring the strait-waistcoat; and his
outlook on life has become so jaundiced through constant association
with coves who are picking straws out of their hair that I was
convinced that Biffy had merely got to press the bulb and nature would
do the rest.

So I patted him on the shoulder and said: 'It's all right, old man!'

'What does Jeeves suggest?' asked Biffy eagerly.

'Jeeves doesn't suggest anything.'

'But you said it was all right.'

'Jeeves isn't the only thinker in the Wooster home, my lad. I have
taken over your little problem, and I can tell you at once that I have
the situation well in hand.'

'You?' said Biffy.

His tone was far from flattering. It suggested a lack of faith in my
abilities, and my view was that an ounce of demonstration would be
worth a ton of explanation. I shoved the bouquet at him.

'Are you fond of flowers, Biffy?' I said.

'Eh?'

'Smell these.'

Biffy extended the old beak in a careworn sort of way, and I pressed
the bulb as per printed instructions on the label.

I do like getting my money's-worth. Elevenpence-ha'penny the thing had
cost me, and it would have been cheap at double. The advertisement on
the outside of the box had said that its effects were 'indescribably
ludicrous', and I can testify that it was no overstatement. Poor old
Biffy leaped three feet in the air and smashed a small table.

'There!' I said.

The old egg was a trifle incoherent at first, but he found words fairly
soon and began to express himself with a good deal of warmth.

'Calm yourself, laddie,' I said, as he paused for breath. 'It was no
mere jest to pass an idle hour. It was a demonstration. Take this,
Biffy, with an old friend's blessing, refill the bulb, shove it into
Sir Roderick's face, press firmly, and leave the rest to him. I'll
guarantee that in something under three seconds the idea will have
dawned on him that you are not required in his family.'

Biffy stared at me.

'Are you suggesting that I squirt Sir Roderick?'

'Absolutely. Squirt him good. Squirt as you have never squirted before.'

'But--'

He was still yammering at me in a feverish sort of way when there was a
ring at the front-door bell.

'Good Lord!' cried Biffy, quivering like a jelly. 'There he is. Talk to
him while I go and change my shirt.'

I had just time to refill the bulb and shove it beside Biffy's plate,
when the door opened and Sir Roderick came in. I was picking up the
fallen table at the moment, and he started talking brightly to my back.

'Good afternoon. I trust I am not--Mr Wooster!'

I'm bound to say I was not feeling entirely at my ease. There is
something about the man that is calculated to strike terror into the
stoutest heart. If ever there was a bloke at the very mention of whose
name it would be excusable for people to tremble like aspens, that
bloke is Sir Roderick Glossop. He has an enormous bald head, all the
hair which ought to be on it seeming to have run into his eyebrows, and
his eyes go through you like a couple of Death Rays.

'How are you, how are you, how are you?' I said, overcoming a slight
desire to leap backwards out of the window. 'Long time since we met,
what?'

'Nevertheless, I remember you most distinctly, Mr Wooster.'

'That's fine,' I said. 'Old Biffy asked me to come and join you in
mangling a bit of lunch.'

He waggled the eyebrows at me.

'Are you a friend of Charles Biffen?'

'Oh, rather. Been friends for years and years.'

He drew in his breath sharply, and I could see that Biffy's stock had
dropped several points. His eye fell on the floor, which was strewn
with things that had tumbled off the upset table.

'Have you had an accident?' he said.

'Nothing serious,' I explained. 'Old Biffy had some sort of fit or
seizure just now and knocked over the table.'

'A fit!'

'Or seizure.'

'Is he subject to fits?'

I was about to answer, when Biffy hurried in. He had forgotten to brush
his hair, which gave him a wild look, and saw the old boy direct a keen
glance at him. It seemed to me that what you might call the preliminary
spade-work had been most satisfactorily attended to and that the
success of the good old bulb could be in no doubt whatever.

Biffy's man came in with the nose-bags and we sat down to lunch.

       *       *       *       *       *

It looked at first as though the meal was going to be one of those
complete frosts which occur from time to time in the career of a
constant luncher-out. Biffy, a very C-3 host, contributed nothing to
the feast of reason and flow of soul beyond an occasional hiccup,
and every time I started to pull a nifty, Sir Roderick swung round
on me with such a piercing stare that it stopped me in my tracks.
Fortunately, however, the second course consisted of a chicken
fricassee of such outstanding excellence that the old boy, after
wolfing a plateful, handed up his dinner-pail for a second instalment
and became almost genial.

'I am here this afternoon, Charles,' he said, with what practically
amounted to bonhomie, 'on what I might describe as a mission. Yes, a
mission. This is most excellent chicken.'

'Glad you like it,' mumbled old Biffy.

'Singularly toothsome,' said Sir Roderick, pronging another half ounce.
'Yes, as I was saying, a mission. You young fellows nowadays are, I
know, content to live in the centre of the most wonderful metropolis
the world has seen, blind and indifferent to its many marvels. I
should be prepared--were I a betting man, which I am not--to wager
a considerable sum that you have never in your life visited even so
historic a spot as Westminster Abbey. Am I right?'

Biffy gurgled something about always having meant to.

'Nor the Tower of London?'

No, nor the Tower of London.

'And there exists at this very moment, not twenty minutes by cab
from Hyde Park Corner, the most supremely absorbing and educational
collection of objects, both animate and inanimate, gathered from the
four corners of the Empire, that has ever been assembled in England's
history. I allude to the British Empire Exhibition now situated at
Wembley.'

'A fellow told me one about Wembley yesterday,' I said, to help on
the cheery flow of conversation. 'Stop me if you've heard it before.
Chap goes up to deaf chap outside the exhibition and says, "Is this
Wembley?" "Hey?" says deaf chap. "Is this Wembley?" says chap. "Hey?"
says deaf chap. "Is this Wembley?" says chap. "No, Thursday," says deaf
chap. Ha, ha, I mean, what?'

The merry laughter froze on my lips. Sir Roderick sort of just waggled
an eyebrow in my direction and I saw that it was back to the basket for
Bertram. I never met a man who had such a knack of making a fellow feel
like a waste-product.

'Have you yet paid a visit to Wembley, Charles?' he asked. 'No?
Precisely as I suspected. Well, that is the mission on which I am here
this afternoon. Honoria wishes me to take you to Wembley. She says it
will broaden your mind, in which view I am at one with her. We will
start immediately after luncheon.'

Biffy cast an imploring look at me.

'You'll come too, Bertie?'

There was such agony in his eyes that I only hesitated for a second.
A pal is a pal. Besides, I felt that, if only the bulb fulfilled the
high expectations I had formed of it, the merry expedition would be
cancelled in no uncertain manner.

'Oh, rather,' I said.

'We must not trespass on Mr Wooster's good nature,' said Sir Roderick,
looking pretty puff-faced.

'Oh, that's all right,' I said. 'I've been meaning to go to the good
old exhibish for a long time. I'll slip home and change my clothes and
pick you up here in my car.'

There was a silence. Biffy seemed too relieved at the thought of not
having to spend the afternoon alone with Sir Roderick to be capable of
speech, and Sir Roderick was registering silent disapproval. And then
he caught sight of the bouquet by Biffy's plate.

'Ah, flowers,' he said. 'Sweet peas, if I am not in error. A charming
plant, pleasing alike to the eye and the nose.'

I caught Biffy's eye across the table. It was bulging, and a strange
light shone in it.

'Are you fond of flowers, Sir Roderick?' he croaked.

'Extremely.'

'Smell these.'

Sir Roderick dipped his head and sniffed. Biffy's fingers closed
slowly over the bulb. I shut my eyes and clutched the table.

'Very pleasant,' I heard Sir Roderick say. 'Very pleasant indeed.'

I opened my eyes, and there was Biffy leaning back in his chair with
a ghastly look, and the bouquet on the cloth beside him. I realized
what had happened. In that supreme crisis of his life, with his whole
happiness depending on a mere pressure of the fingers, Biffy, the poor
spineless fish, had lost his nerve. My closely reasoned scheme had gone
phut.

Jeeves was fooling about with the geraniums in the sitting-room
window-box when I got home.

'They make a very nice display, sir,' he said, cocking a paternal eye
at the things.

'Don't talk to me about flowers,' I said. 'Jeeves, I know now how a
general feels when he plans out some great scientific movement and his
troops let him down at the eleventh hour.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'Yes,' I said, and told him what had happened.

He listened thoughtfully.

'A somewhat vacillating and changeable young gentleman, Mr Biffen,' was
his comment when I had finished. 'Would you be requiring me for the
remainder of the afternoon, sir?'

'No. I'm going to Wembley. I just came back to change and get the car.
Produce some fairly durable garments which can stand getting squashed
by the many-headed, Jeeves, and then phone to the garage.'

'Very good, sir. The grey cheviot lounge will, I fancy, be suitable.
Would it be too much if I asked you to give me a seat in the car, sir?
I had thought of going to Wembley myself this afternoon.'

'Eh? Oh, all right.'

'Thank you very much, sir.'

I got dressed, and we drove round to Biffy's flat. Biffy and Sir
Roderick got in at the back and Jeeves climbed into the front seat next
to me. Biffy looked so ill-attuned to an afternoon's pleasure that my
heart bled for the blighter and I made one last attempt to appeal to
Jeeves's better feelings.

'I must say, Jeeves,' I said, 'I'm dashed disappointed in you.'

'I am sorry to hear that, sir.'

'Well, I am. Dashed disappointed. I do think you might rally round. Did
you see Mr Biffen's face?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Well, then.'

'If you will pardon my saying so, sir, Mr Biffen has surely only
himself to thank if he has entered upon matrimonial obligations which
do not please him.'

'You're talking absolute rot, Jeeves. You know as well as I do that
Honoria Glossop is an Act of God. You might just as well blame a fellow
for getting run over by a truck.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Absolutely yes. Besides, the poor ass wasn't in a condition to resist.
He told me all about it. He had lost the only girl he had ever loved,
and you know what a man's like when that happens to him.'

'How was that, sir?'

'Apparently he fell in love with some girl on the boat going over to
New York, and they parted at the Customs sheds, arranging to meet next
day at her hotel. Well, you know what Biffy's like. He forgets his own
name half the time. He never made a note of the address, and it passed
clean out of his mind. He went about in a sort of trance, and suddenly
woke up to find that he was engaged to Honoria Glossop.'

'I did not know of this, sir.'

'I don't suppose anybody knows of it except me. He told me when I was
in Paris.'

'I should have supposed it would have been feasible to make inquiries,
sir.'

'That's what I said. But he had forgotten her name.'

'That sounds remarkable, sir.'

'I said that too. But it's a fact. All he remembered was that her
Christian name was Mabel. Well, you can't go scouring New York for a
girl named Mabel, what?'

'I appreciate the difficulty, sir.'

'Well, there it is, then.'

'I see, sir.'

We had got into a mob of vehicles outside the Exhibition by this
time, and, some tricky driving being indicated, I had to suspend the
conversation. We parked ourselves eventually and went in. Jeeves
drifted away, and Sir Roderick took charge of the expedition. He headed
for the Palace of Industry, with Biffy and myself trailing behind.

Well, you know, I have never been much of a lad for exhibitions. The
citizenry in the mass always rather puts me off, and after I have been
shuffling along with the multitude for a quarter of an hour or so I
feel as if I were walking on hot bricks. About this particular binge,
too, there seemed to me a lack of what you might call human interest. I
mean to say, millions of people, no doubt, are so constituted that they
scream with joy and excitement at the spectacle of a stuffed porcupine
fish or a glass jar of seeds from Western Australia--but not Bertram.
No; if you will take the word of one who would not deceive you, not
Bertram. By the time we had tottered out of the Gold Coast village and
were working towards the Palace of Machinery, everything pointed to my
shortly executing a quiet sneak in the direction of that rather jolly
Planters' Bar in the West Indian section. Sir Roderick had whizzed us
past this at a high rate of speed, it touching no chord in him; but I
had been able to observe that there was a sprightly sportsman behind
the counter mixing things out of bottles and stirring them up with a
stick in long glasses that seemed to have ice in them, and the urge
came upon me to see more of this man. I was about to drop away from
the main body and become a straggler, when something pawed at my coat
sleeve. It was Biffy, and he had the air of one who has had about
sufficient.

There are certain moments in life when words are not needed. I looked
at Biffy, Biffy looked at me. A perfect understanding linked our two
souls.

'?'

'!'

Three minutes later we had joined the Planters.

I have never been in the West Indies, but I am in a position to state
that in certain of the fundamentals of life they are streets ahead
of our European civilization. The man behind the counter, as kindly
a bloke as I ever wish to meet, seemed to guess our requirements the
moment we hove in view. Scarcely had our elbows touched the wood before
he was leaping to and fro, bringing down a new bottle with each leap.
A planter, apparently, does not consider he has had a drink unless it
contains at least seven ingredients, and I'm not saying, mind you, that
he isn't right. The man behind the bar told us the things were called
Green Swizzles; and, if ever I marry and have a son, Green Swizzle
Wooster is the name that will go down on the register, in memory of the
day his father's life was saved at Wembley.

After the third, Biffy breathed a contented sigh.

'Where do you think Sir Roderick is?' he said.

'Biffy, old thing,' I replied frankly, 'I'm not worrying.'

'Bertie, old bird,' said Biffy, 'nor am I.'

He sighed again, and broke a long silence by asking the man for a straw.

'Bertie,' he said, 'I've just remembered something rather rummy. You
know Jeeves?'

I said I knew Jeeves.

'Well, a rather rummy incident occurred as we were going into this
place. Old Jeeves sidled up to me and said something rather rummy.
You'll never guess what it was.'

'No. I don't believe I ever shall.'

'Jeeves said,' proceeded Biffy earnestly, 'and I am quoting his very
words--Jeeves said, "Mr Biffen"--addressing me, you understand--'

'I understand.'

'"Mr Biffen," he said, "I strongly advise you to visit the--"'

'The what?' I asked as he paused.

'Bertie, old man,' said Biffy, deeply concerned, 'I've absolutely
forgotten!'

I stared at the man.

'What I can't understand,' I said, 'is how you manage to run that
Herefordshire place of yours for a day. How on earth do you remember to
milk the cows and give the pigs their dinner?'

'Oh, that's all right. There are divers blokes about the
places--hirelings and menials, you know--who look after all that.'

'Ah!' I said. 'Well, that being so, let us have one more Green Swizzle,
and then hey for the Amusement Park.'

       *       *       *       *       *

When I indulged in those few rather bitter words about exhibitions, it
must be distinctly understood that I was not alluding to what you might
call the more earthy portion of these curious places. I yield to no man
in my approval of those institutions where on payment of a shilling you
are permitted to slide down a slippery runway sitting on a mat. I love
the Jiggle-Joggle, and I am prepared to take on all and sundry at Skee
Ball for money, stamps, or Brazil nuts.

But, joyous reveller as I am on these occasions, I was simply not in
it with old Biffy. Whether it was the Green Swizzles or merely the
relief of being parted from Sir Roderick, I don't know, but Biffy flung
himself into the pastimes of the proletariat with a zest that was
almost frightening. I could hardly drag him away from the Whip, and as
for the Switchback, he looked like spending the rest of his life on it.
I managed to remove him at last, and he was wandering through the crowd
at my side with gleaming eyes, hesitating between having his fortune
told and taking a whirl at the Wheel of Joy, when he suddenly grabbed
my arm and uttered a sharp animal cry.

'Bertie!'

'Now what?'

He was pointing at a large sign over a building.

'Look! Palace of Beauty!'

I tried to choke him off. I was getting a bit weary by this time. Not
so young as I was.

'You don't want to go in there,' I said. 'A fellow at the club was
telling me about that. It's only a lot of girls. You don't want to see
a lot of girls.'

'I do want to see a lot of girls,' said Biffy firmly. 'Dozens of
girls, and the more unlike Honoria they are, the better. Besides,
I've suddenly remembered that that's the place Jeeves told me to be
sure and visit. It all comes back to me. "Mr Biffen," he said, "I
strongly advise you to visit the Palace of Beauty." Now, what the man
was driving at or what his motive was, I don't know; but I ask you,
Bertie, is it wise, is it safe, is it judicious ever to ignore Jeeves's
lightest word? We enter by the door on the left.'

I don't know if you know this Palace of Beauty place? It's a sort of
aquarium full of the delicately nurtured instead of fishes. You go in,
and there is a kind of cage with a female goggling out at you through a
sheet of plate glass. She's dressed in some weird kind of costume, and
over the cage is written 'Helen of Troy'. You pass on to the next, and
there's another one doing jiu-jitsu with a snake. Sub-title, Cleopatra.
You get the idea--Famous Women Through the Ages and all that. I can't
say it fascinated me to any great extent. I maintain that lovely
woman loses a lot of her charm if you have to stare at her in a tank.
Moreover, it gave me a rummy sort of feeling of having wandered into
the wrong bedroom at a country house, and I was flying past at a fair
rate of speed, anxious to get it over, when Biffy suddenly went off his
rocker.

At least, it looked like that. He let out a piercing yell, grabbed my
arm with a sudden clutch that felt like the bite of a crocodile, and
stood there gibbering.

'Wuk!' ejaculated Biffy, or words to that general import.

A large and interested crowd had gathered round. I think they thought
the girls were going to be fed or something. But Biffy paid no
attention to them. He was pointing in a loony manner at one of the
cages. I forget which it was, but the female inside wore a ruff, so it
may have been Queen Elizabeth or Boadicea or someone of that period.
She was rather a nice-looking girl, and she was staring at Biffy in
much the same pop-eyed way as he was staring at her.

'Mabel!' yelled Biffy, going off in my ear like a bomb.

I can't say I was feeling my chirpiest. Drama is all very well, but I
hate getting mixed up in it in a public spot; and I had not realized
before how dashed public this spot was. The crowd seemed to have
doubled itself in the last five seconds, and, while most of them had
their eye on Biffy, quite a goodish few were looking at me as if they
thought I was an important principal in the scene and might be expected
at any moment to give of my best in the way of wholesome entertainment
for the masses.

Biffy was jumping about like a lamb in the springtime--and, what is
more, a feeble-minded lamb.

'Bertie! It's her! It's she!' He looked about him wildly. 'Where the
deuce is the stage-door?' he cried. 'Where's the manager? I want to see
the house-manager immediately.'

And then he suddenly bounded forward and began hammering on the glass
with his stick.

'I say, old lad!' I began, but he shook me off.

These fellows who live in the country are apt to go in for fairly
sizable clubs instead of the light canes which your well-dressed
man about town considers suitable for metropolitan use; and down in
Herefordshire, apparently, something in the nature of a knobkerrie is
_de rigueur_. Biffy's first slosh smashed the glass all to a hash.
Three more cleared the way for him to go into the cage without cutting
himself. And, before the crowd had time to realize what a wonderful
bob's-worth it was getting in exchange for its entrance fee, he was
inside, engaging the girl in earnest conversation. And at the same
moment two large policemen rolled up.

You can't make policemen take the romantic view. Not a tear did these
two blighters stop to brush away. They were inside the cage and out
of it and marching Biffy through the crowd before you had time to
blink. I hurried after them, to do what I could in the way of soothing
Biffy's last moments, and the poor old lad turned a glowing face in my
direction.

'Chiswick, 60873,' he bellowed in a voice charged with emotion. 'Write
it down, Bertie, or I shall forget it. Chiswick, 60873. Her telephone
number.'

And then he disappeared, accompanied by about eleven thousand
sightseers, and a voice spoke at my elbow.

'Mr Wooster! What--what--what is the meaning of this?'

Sir Roderick, with bigger eyebrows than ever, was standing at my side.

'It's all right,' I said. 'Poor old Biffy's only gone off his crumpet.'

He tottered.

'What?'

'Had a sort of fit or seizure, you know.'

'Another!' Sir Roderick drew a deep breath. 'And this is the man I was
about to allow my daughter to marry!' I heard him mutter.

I tapped him in a kindly spirit on the shoulder. It took some doing,
mark you, but I did it.

'If I were you,' I said, 'I should call that off. Scratch the fixture.
Wash it out absolutely, is my advice.'

He gave me a nasty look.

'I do not require your advice, Mr Wooster! I had already arrived
independently at the decision of which you speak. Mr Wooster, you are a
friend of this man--a fact which should in itself have been sufficient
warning to me. You will--unlike myself--be seeing him again. Kindly
inform him, when you do see him, that he may consider his engagement at
an end.'

'Right-ho,' I said, and hurried off after the crowd. It seemed to me
that a little bailing-out might be in order.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was about an hour later that I shoved my way out to where I had
parked the car. Jeeves was sitting in the front seat, brooding over the
cosmos. He rose courteously as I approached.

'You are leaving, sir?'

'I am.'

'And Sir Roderick, sir?'

'Not coming. I am revealing no secrets, Jeeves, when I inform you that
he and I have parted brass rags. Not on speaking terms now.'

'Indeed, sir? And Mr Biffen? Will you wait for him?'

'No. He's in prison.'

'Really, sir?'

'Yes. I tried to bail him out, but they decided on second thoughts to
coop him up for the night.'

'What was his offence, sir?'

'You remember that girl of his I was telling you about? He found her
in a tank at the Palace of Beauty and went after her by the quickest
route, which was via a plate-glass window. He was then scooped up and
borne off in irons by the constabulary.' I gazed sideways at him. It
is difficult to bring off a penetrating glance out of the corner of
your eye, but I managed it. 'Jeeves,' I said, 'there is more in this
than the casual observer would suppose. You told Mr Biffen to go to the
Palace of Beauty. Did you know the girl would be there?'

'Yes, sir.'

This was most remarkable and rummy to a degree.

'Dash it, do you know everything?'

'Oh, no, sir,' said Jeeves with an indulgent smile. Humouring the young
master.

'Well, how did you know that?'

'I happen to be acquainted with the future Mrs Biffen, sir.'

'I see. Then you knew all about that business in New York?'

'Yes, sir. And it was for that reason that I was not altogether
favourably disposed towards Mr Biffen when you were first kind enough
to suggest that I might be able to offer some slight assistance.
I mistakenly supposed that he had been trifling with the girl's
affections, sir. But when you told me the true facts of the case I
appreciated the injustice I had done to Mr Biffen and endeavoured to
make amends.'

'Well, he certainly owes you a lot. He's crazy about her.'

'That is very gratifying, sir.'

'And she ought to be pretty grateful to you, too. Old Biffy's got
fifteen thousand a year, not to mention more cows, pigs, hens, and
ducks than he knows what to do with. A dashed useful bird to have in
any family.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Tell me, Jeeves,' I said, 'how did you happen to know the girl in the
first place?'

Jeeves looked dreamily out into the traffic.

'She is my niece, sir. If I might make the suggestion, sir, I should
not jerk the steering wheel with quite such suddenness. We very nearly
collided with that omnibus.'




                         7--Without the Option


The evidence was all in. The machinery of the law had worked without a
hitch. And the beak, having adjusted a pair of pince-nez which looked
as though they were going to do a nose dive any moment, coughed like
a pained sheep and slipped us the bad news. 'The prisoner, Wooster,'
he said--and who can paint the shame and agony of Bertram at hearing
himself so described?--'will pay a fine of five pounds.'

'Oh, rather!' I said. 'Absolutely! Like a shot!'

I was dashed glad to get the thing settled at such a reasonable figure.
I gazed across what they call the sea of faces till I picked up Jeeves,
sitting at the back. Stout fellow, he had come to see the young master
through his hour of trial.

'I say, Jeeves,' I sang out, 'have you got a fiver? I'm a bit short.'

'Silence!' bellowed some officious blighter.

'It's all right,' I said; 'just arranging the financial details. Got
the stuff, Jeeves?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Good egg!'

'Are you a friend of the prisoner?' asked the beak.

'I am in Mr Wooster's employment, Your Worship, in the capacity of
gentleman's personal gentleman.'

'Then pay the fine to the clerk.'

'Very good, Your Worship.'

The beak gave a coldish nod in my direction, as much as to say that
they might now strike the fetters from my wrists; and having hitched up
the pince-nez once more, proceeded to hand poor old Sippy one of the
nastiest looks ever seen in Bosher Street Police Court.

'The case of the prisoner Leon Trotzky--which,' he said, giving
Sippy the eye again, 'I am strongly inclined to think an assumed and
fictitious name--is more serious. He has been convicted of a wanton and
violent assault upon the police. The evidence of the officer has proved
that the prisoner struck him in the abdomen, causing severe internal
pain, and in other ways interfered with him in the execution of his
duties. I am aware that on the night following the annual aquatic
contest between the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge a certain
licence is traditionally granted by the authorities, but aggravated
acts of ruffianly hooliganism like that of the prisoner Trotzky cannot
be overlooked or palliated. He will serve a sentence of thirty days in
the Second Division without the option of a fine.'

'No, I say--here--hi--dash it all!' protested poor old Sippy.

'Silence!' bellowed the officious blighter.

'Next case,' said the beak. And that was that.

       *       *       *       *       *

The whole affair was most unfortunate. Memory is a trifle blurred; but
as far as I can piece together the facts, what happened was more or
less this:

Abstemious cove though I am as a general thing, there is one night in
the year when, putting all other engagements aside, I am rather apt to
let myself go a bit and renew my lost youth, as it were. The night to
which I allude is the one following the annual aquatic contest between
the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge; or, putting it another
way, Boat-Race Night. Then, if ever, you will see Bertram under the
influence. And on this occasion, I freely admit, I had been doing
myself rather juicily, with the result that when I ran into old Sippy
opposite the Empire I was in quite fairly bonhomous mood. This being
so, it cut me to the quick to perceive that Sippy, generally the
brightest of revellers, was far from being his usual sunny self. He had
the air of a man with a secret sorrow.

'Bertie,' he said as we strolled along towards Piccadilly Circus, 'the
heart bowed down by weight of woe to weakest hope will cling.' Sippy is
by way of being an author, though mainly dependent for the necessaries
of life on subsidies from an old aunt who lives in the country, and
his conversation often takes a literary turn. 'But the trouble is that
I have no hope to cling to, weak or otherwise. I am up against it,
Bertie.'

'In what way, laddie?'

'I've got to go tomorrow and spend three weeks with some absolutely
dud--I will go further--some positively scaly friends of my Aunt Vera.
She has fixed the thing up, and may a nephew's curse blister every bulb
in her garden.'

'Who are these hounds of hell?' I asked.

'Some people named Pringle. I haven't seen them since I was ten, but I
remember them at that time striking me as England's premier warts.'

'Tough luck. No wonder you've lost your morale.'

'The world,' said Sippy, 'is very grey. How can I shake off this awful
depression?'

It was then that I got one of those bright ideas one does get round
about 11.30 on Boat-Race Night.

'What you want, old man,' I said, 'is a policeman's helmet.'

'Do I, Bertie?'

'If I were you, I'd just step straight across the street and get that
one over there.'

'But there's a policeman inside it. You can see him distinctly.'

'What does that matter?' I said. I simply couldn't follow his reasoning.

Sippy stood for a moment in thought.

'I believe you're absolutely right,' he said at last. 'Funny I never
thought of it before. You really recommend me to get that helmet?'

'I do, indeed.'

'Then I will,' said Sippy, brightening up in the most remarkable manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

So there you have the posish, and you can see why, as I left the dock a
free man, remorse gnawed at my vitals. In his twenty-fifth year, with
life opening out before him and all that sort of thing, Oliver Randolph
Sipperley had become a jail-bird, and it was all my fault. It was I who
had dragged that fine spirit down into the mire, so to speak, and the
question now arose, What could I do to atone?

Obviously the first move must be to get in touch with Sippy and see if
he had any last messages and what-not. I pushed about a bit, making
inquiries, and presently found myself in a little dark room with
whitewashed walls and a wooden bench. Sippy was sitting on the bench
with his head in his hands.

'How are you, old lad?' I asked in a hushed, bedside voice.

'I'm a ruined man,' said Sippy, looking like a poached egg.

'Oh, come,' I said, 'it's not so bad as all that. I mean to say,
you had the swift intelligence to give a false name. There won't be
anything about you in the papers.'

'I'm not worrying about the papers. What's bothering me is, how can I
go and spend three weeks with the Pringles, starting today, when I've
got to sit in a prison cell with a ball and chain on my ankle?'

'But you said you didn't want to go.'

'It isn't a question of wanting, fathead. I've got to go. If I don't
my aunt will find out where I am. And if she finds out that I am doing
thirty days, without the option, in the lowest dungeon beneath the
castle moat--well, where shall I get off?'

I saw his point.

'This is not a thing we can settle for ourselves,' I said gravely.
'We must put our trust in a higher power. Jeeves is the man we must
consult.'

And having collected a few of the necessary data, I shook his hand,
patted him on the back and tooled off home to Jeeves.

'Jeeves,' I said, when I had climbed outside the pick-me-up which he
had thoughtfully prepared against my coming, 'I've got something to
tell you; something important; something that vitally affects one
whom you have always regarded with--one whom you have always looked
upon--one whom you have--well, to cut a long story short, as I'm not
feeling quite myself--Mr Sipperley.'

'Yes, sir?'

'Jeeves, Mr Souperley is in the sip.'

'Sir?'

'I mean, Mr Sipperley is in the soup.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'And all owing to me. It was I who, in a moment of mistaken kindness,
wishing only to cheer him up and give him something to occupy his mind,
recommended him to pinch that policeman's helmet.'

'Is that so, sir?'

'Do you mind not intoning the responses, Jeeves?' I said. 'This is a
most complicated story for a man with a headache to have to tell, and
if you interrupt you'll make me lose the thread. As a favour to me,
therefore, don't do it. Just nod every now and then to show that you're
following me.'

I closed my eyes and marshalled the facts.

'To start with then, Jeeves, you may or may not know that Mr Sipperley
is practically dependent on his Aunt Vera.'

'Would that be Miss Sipperley of the Paddock, Beckley-on-the-Moor, in
Yorkshire, sir?'

'Yes. Don't tell me you know her!'

'Not personally, sir. But I have a cousin residing in the village who
has some slight acquaintance with Miss Sipperley. He has described her
to me as an imperious and quick-tempered old lady.... But I beg your
pardon, sir, I should have nodded.'

'Quite right, you should have nodded. Yes, Jeeves, you should have
nodded. But it's too late now.'

I nodded myself. I hadn't had my eight hours the night before, and what
you might call a lethargy was showing a tendency to steal over me from
time to time.

'Yes, sir?' said Jeeves.

'Oh--ah--yes,' I said, giving myself a bit of a hitch up. 'Where had I
got to?'

'You were saying that Mr Sipperley is practically dependent upon Miss
Sipperley, sir.'

'Was I?'

'You were, sir.'

'You're perfectly right; so I was. Well, then, you can readily
understand, Jeeves, that he has got to take jolly good care to keep in
with her. You get that?'

Jeeves nodded.

'Now mark this closely: The other day she wrote to old Sippy, telling
him to come down and sing at her village concert. It was equivalent to
a royal command, if you see what I mean, so Sippy couldn't refuse in so
many words. But he had sung at her village concert once before and had
got the bird in no uncertain manner, so he wasn't playing any return
dates. You follow so far, Jeeves?'

Jeeves nodded.

'So what did he do, Jeeves? He did what seemed to him at the moment
a rather brainy thing. He told her that, though he would have been
delighted to sing at her village concert, by a most unfortunate chance
an editor had commissioned him to write a series of articles on the
colleges of Cambridge and he was obliged to pop down there at once and
would be away for quite three weeks. All clear up to now?'

Jeeves inclined the coco-nut.

'Whereupon, Jeeves, Miss Sipperley wrote back, saying that she quite
realized that work must come before pleasure--pleasure being her loose
way of describing the act of singing songs at the Beckley-on-the-Moor
concert and getting the laugh from the local toughs; but that, if he
was going to Cambridge, he must certainly stay with her friends, the
Pringles, at their house just outside the town. And she dropped them a
line telling them to expect him on the twenty-eighth, and they dropped
another line saying right-ho, and the thing was settled. And now Mr
Sipperley is in the jug, and what will be the ultimate outcome or
upshot? Jeeves, it is a problem worthy of your great intellect. I rely
on you.'

'I will do my best to justify your confidence, sir.'

'Carry on, then. And meanwhile pull down the blinds and bring a couple
more cushions and heave that small chair this way so that I can put my
feet up, and then go away and brood and let me hear from you in--say, a
couple of hours, or maybe three. And if anybody calls and wants to see
me, inform them that I am dead.'

'Dead, sir?'

'Dead. You won't be so far wrong.'

It must have been well towards evening when I woke up with a crick in
my neck but otherwise somewhat refreshed. I pressed the bell.

'I looked in twice, sir,' said Jeeves, 'but on each occasion you were
asleep and I did not like to disturb you.'

'The right spirit, Jeeves.... Well?'

'I have been giving close thought to the little problem which you
indicated, sir, and I can see only one solution.'

'One is enough. What do you suggest?'

'That you go to Cambridge in Mr Sipperley's place, sir.'

I stared at the man. Certainly I was feeling a good deal better than
I had been a few hours before; but I was far from being in a fit
condition to have rot like this talked to me.

'Jeeves,' I said sternly, 'pull yourself together. This is mere babble
from the sickbed.'

'I fear I can suggest no other plan of action, sir, which will
extricate Mr Sipperley from his dilemma.'

'But think! Reflect! Why, even I, in spite of having had a disturbed
night and a most painful morning with the minions of the law, can see
that the scheme is a loony one. To put the finger on only one leak in
the thing, it isn't me these people want to see; it's Mr Sipperley.
They don't know me from Adam.'

'So much the better, sir. For what I am suggesting is that you go to
Cambridge, affecting actually to be Mr Sipperley.'

This was too much.

'Jeeves,' I said, and I'm not half sure there weren't tears in my eyes,
'surely you can see for yourself that this is pure banana oil. It is
not like you to come into the presence of a sick man and gibber.'

'I think the plan I have suggested would be practicable, sir. While you
were sleeping, I was able to have a few words with Mr Sipperley, and he
informed me that Professor and Mrs Pringle have not set eyes upon him
since he was a lad of ten.'

'No, that's true. He told me that. But even so, they would be sure to
ask him questions about my aunt--or rather his aunt. Where would I be
then?'

'Mr Sipperley was kind enough to give me a few facts respecting Miss
Sipperley, sir, which I jotted down. With these, added to what my
cousin has told me of the lady's habits, I think you would be in a
position to answer any ordinary question.'

There is something dashed insidious about Jeeves. Time and again
since we first came together he has stunned me with some apparently
drivelling suggestion or scheme or ruse or plan of campaign, and after
about five minutes has convinced me that it is not only sound but
fruity. It took nearly a quarter of an hour to reason me into this
particular one, it being considerably the weirdest to date; but he did
it. I was holding out pretty firmly, when he suddenly clinched the
thing.

'I would certainly suggest, sir,' he said, 'that you left London as
soon as possible and remained hid for some little time in some retreat
where you would not be likely to be found.'

'Eh? Why?'

'During the last hours Mrs Spenser has been on the telephone three
times, sir, endeavouring to get into communication with you.'

'Aunt Agatha!' I cried, paling beneath my tan.

'Yes, sir. I gathered from her remarks that she had been reading in
the evening paper a report of this morning's proceedings in the police
court.'

I hopped from the chair like a jack rabbit of the prairie. If Aunt
Agatha was out with her hatchet, a move was most certainly indicated.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'this is a time for deeds, not words. Pack--and that
right speedily.'

'I have packed, sir.'

'Find out when there is a train for Cambridge.'

'There is one in forty minutes, sir.'

'Call a taxi.'

'A taxi is at the door, sir.'

'Good!' I said. 'Then lead me to it.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The Maison Pringle was quite a bit of a way out of Cambridge, a mile
or two down the Trumpington Road; and when I arrived everybody was
dressing for dinner. So it wasn't till I had shoved on the evening
raiment and got down to the drawing-room that I met the gang.

'Hullo-ullo!' I said, taking a deep breath and floating in.

I tried to speak in a clear and ringing voice, but I wasn't feeling my
chirpiest. It is always a nervous job for a diffident and unassuming
bloke to visit a strange house for the first time; and it doesn't
make the thing any better when he goes there pretending to be another
fellow. I was conscious of a rather pronounced sinking feeling, which
the appearance of the Pringles did nothing to allay.

Sippy had described them as England's premier warts, and it looked to
me as if he might be about right. Professor Pringle was a thinnish,
baldish, dyspeptic-lookingish cove with an eye like a haddock, while
Mrs Pringle's aspect was that of one who had had bad news round about
the year 1900 and never really got over it. And I was just staggering
under the impact of these two when I was introduced to a couple of
ancient females with shawls all over them.

'No doubt you remember my mother?' said Professor Pringle mournfully,
indicating Exhibit A.

'Oh-ah!' I said, achieving a bit of a beam.

'And my aunt,' sighed the prof, as if things were getting worse and
worse.

'Well, well, well!' I said, shooting another beam in the direction of
Exhibit B.

'They were saying only this morning that they remembered you,' groaned
the prof, abandoning all hope.

There was a pause. The whole strength of the company gazed at me like a
family group out of one of Edgar Allan Poe's less cheery yarns, and I
felt my _joie de vivre_ dying at the roots.

'I remember Oliver,' said Exhibit A. She heaved a sigh. 'He was such a
pretty child. What a pity! What a pity!'

Tactful, of course, and calculated to put the guest completely at his
ease.

'I remember Oliver,' said Exhibit B, looking at me in much the same way
as the Bosher Street beak had looked at Sippy before putting on the
black cap. 'Nasty little boy! He teased my cat.'

'Aunt Jane's memory is wonderful, considering that she will be
eighty-seven next birthday,' whispered Mrs Pringle with mournful pride.

'What did you say?' asked the Exhibit suspiciously.

'I said your memory was wonderful.'

'Ah!' The dear old creature gave me another glare. I could see that no
beautiful friendship was to be looked for by Bertram in this quarter.
'He chased my Tibby all over the garden, shooting arrows at her from a
bow.'

At this moment a cat strolled out from under the sofa and made for me
with its tail up. Cats always do take to me, which made it all the
sadder that I should be saddled with Sippy's criminal record. I stooped
to tickle it under the ear, such being my invariable policy, and the
Exhibit uttered a piercing cry.

'Stop him! Stop him!'

She leaped forward, moving uncommonly well for one of her years, and
having scooped up the cat, stood eyeing me with bitter defiance, as if
daring me to start anything. Most unpleasant.

'I like cats,' I said feebly.

It didn't go. The sympathy of the audience was not with me. And
conversation was at what you might call a low ebb, when the door opened
and a girl came in.

'My daughter Heloise,' said the prof moodily, as if he hated to admit
it.

I turned to mitt the female, and stood there with my hand out, gaping.
I can't remember when I've had such a nasty shock.

I suppose everybody has had the experience of suddenly meeting
somebody who reminded them frightfully of some fearful person. I mean
to say, by way of an example, once when I was golfing in Scotland I saw
a woman come into the hotel who was the living image of my Aunt Agatha.
Probably a very decent sort, if I had only waited to see, but I didn't
wait. I legged it that evening, utterly unable to stand the spectacle.
And on another occasion I was driven out of a thoroughly festive night
club because the head waiter reminded me of my Uncle Percy.

Well, Heloise Pringle, in the most ghastly way, resembled Honoria
Glossop.

I think I may have told you before about this Glossop scourge. She was
the daughter of Sir Roderick Glossop, the loony-doctor, and I had been
engaged to her for about three weeks, much against my wishes, when the
old boy most fortunately got the idea that I was off my rocker and put
the bee on the proceedings. Since then the mere thought of her had been
enough to make me start out of my sleep with a loud cry. And this girl
was exactly like her.

'Er--how are you?' I said.

'How do you do?'

Her voice put the lid on it. It might have been Honoria herself
talking. Honoria Glossop has a voice like a lion tamer making some
authoritative announcement to one of the troupe, and so had this girl.
I backed away convulsively and sprang into the air as my foot stubbed
itself against something squashy. A sharp yowl rent the air, followed
by an indignant cry, and I turned to see Aunt Jane, on all fours,
trying to put things right with the cat, which had gone to earth under
the sofa. She gave me a look, and I could see that her worst fears had
been realized.

At this juncture dinner was announced--not before I was ready for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Jeeves,' I said, when I got him alone that night, 'I am no faint
heart, but I am inclined to think that this binge is going to prove a
shade above the odds.'

'You are not enjoying your visit, sir?'

'I am not, Jeeves. Have you seen Miss Pringle?'

'Yes, sir, from a distance.'

'The best way to see her. Did you observe her keenly?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Did she remind you of anybody?'

'She appeared to me to bear a remarkable likeness to her cousin, Miss
Glossop, sir.'

'Her cousin! You don't mean to say she's Honoria Glossop's cousin!'

'Yes, sir. Mrs Pringle was a Miss Blatherwick--the younger of two
sisters, the elder of whom married Sir Roderick Glossop.'

'Great Scott! That accounts for the resemblance.'

'Yes, sir.'

'And what a resemblance, Jeeves! She even talks like Miss Glossop.'

'Indeed, sir? I have not yet heard Miss Pringle speak.'

'You have missed little. And what it amounts to, Jeeves, is that,
though nothing will induce me to let old Sippy down, I can see that
this visit is going to try me high. At a pinch, I could stand the
prof and wife. I could even make the effort of a lifetime and bear
up against Aunt Jane. But to expect a man to mix daily with the girl
Heloise--and to do it, what is more, on lemonade, which is all there
was to drink at dinner--is to ask too much of him. What shall I do,
Jeeves?'

'I think that you should avoid Miss Pringle's society as much as
possible.'

'The same great thought had occurred to me,' I said.

It is all very well, though, to talk airily about avoiding a female's
society; but when you are living in the same house with her, and she
doesn't want to avoid you, it takes a bit of doing. It is a peculiar
thing in life that the people you most particularly want to edge
away from always seem to cluster round like a poultice. I hadn't been
twenty-four hours in the place before I perceived that I was going to
see a lot of this pestilence.

She was one of those girls you're always meeting on the stairs and
in passages. I couldn't go into a room without seeing her drift in a
minute later. And if I walked in the garden she was sure to leap out at
me from a laurel bush or the onion bed or something. By about the tenth
day I had begun to feel absolutely haunted.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'I have begun to feel absolutely haunted.'

'Sir?'

'This woman dogs me. I never seem to get a moment to myself. Old Sippy
was supposed to come here to make a study of the Cambridge colleges,
and she took me round about fifty-seven this morning. This afternoon
I went to sit in the garden, and she popped up through a trap and was
in my midst. This evening she cornered me in the morning-room. It's
getting so that, when I have a bath, I wouldn't be a bit surprised to
find her nestling in the soap dish.'

'Extremely trying, sir.'

'Dashed so. Have you any remedy to suggest?'

'Not at the moment, sir. Miss Pringle does appear to be distinctly
interested in you, sir. She was asking me questions this morning
respecting your mode of life in London.'

'What?'

'Yes, sir.'

I stared at the man in horror. A ghastly thought had struck me. I
quivered like an aspen.

At lunch that day a curious thing had happened. We had just finished
mangling the cutlets and I was sitting back in my chair, taking a bit
of an easy before being allotted my slab of boiled pudding, when,
happening to look up, I caught the girl Heloise's eye fixed on me in
what seemed to me a rather rummy manner. I didn't think much about it
at the time, because boiled pudding is a thing you have to give your
undivided attention to if you want to do yourself justice; but now,
recalling the episode in the light of Jeeves's words, the full sinister
meaning of the thing seemed to come home to me.

Even at the moment, something about that look had struck me as oddly
familiar, and now I suddenly saw why. It had been the identical
look which I had observed in the eye of Honoria Glossop in the days
immediately preceding our engagement--the look of a tigress that has
marked down its prey.

'Jeeves, do you know what I think?'

'Sir?'

I gulped slightly.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'listen attentively. I don't want to give the
impression that I consider myself one of those deadly coves who
exercise an irresistible fascination over one and all and can't meet
a girl without wrecking her peace of mind in the first half-minute.
As a matter of fact, it's rather the other way with me, for girls on
entering my presence are mostly inclined to give me the raised eyebrow
and the twitching upper lip. Nobody, therefore, can say that I am a man
who's likely to take alarm unnecessarily. You admit that, don't you?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Nevertheless, Jeeves, it is a known scientific fact that there is a
particular style of female that does seem strangely attracted to the
sort of fellow I am.'

'Very true, sir.'

'I mean to say, I know perfectly well that I've got, roughly speaking,
half the amount of brain a normal bloke ought to possess. And when a
girl comes along who has about twice the regular allowance, she too
often makes a bee line for me with the love-light in her eyes. I don't
know how to account for it, but it is so.'

'It may be Nature's provision for maintaining the balance of the
species, sir.'

'Very possibly. Anyway, it has happened to me over and over again. It
was what happened in the case of Honoria Glossop. She was notoriously
one of the brainiest women of her year at Girton, and she just gathered
me in like a bull pup swallowing a piece of steak.'

'Miss Pringle, I am informed, sir, was an even more brilliant scholar
than Miss Glossop.'

'Well, there you are! Jeeves, she looks at me.'

'Yes, sir?'

'I keep meeting her on the stairs and in passages.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'She recommends me books to read, to improve my mind.'

'Highly suggestive, sir.'

'And at breakfast this morning, when I was eating a sausage, she
told me I shouldn't, as modern medical science held that a four-inch
sausage contained as many germs as a dead rat. The maternal touch, you
understand; fussing over my health.'

'I think we may regard that, sir, as practically conclusive.'

I sank into a chair, thoroughly pipped.

'What's to be done, Jeeves?'

'We must think, sir.'

'You think. I haven't the machinery.'

'I will most certainly devote my very best attention to the matter,
sir, and will endeavour to give satisfaction.'

Well, that was something. But I was ill at ease. Yes, there is no
getting away from it, Bertram was ill at ease.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning we visited sixty-three more Cambridge colleges, and after
lunch I said I was going to my room to lie down. After staying there
for half an hour to give the coast time to clear, I shoved a book and
smoking materials in my pocket, and climbing out of a window, shinned
down a convenient water-pipe into the garden. My objective was the
summer-house, where it seemed to me that a man might put in a quiet
hour or so without interruption.

It was extremely jolly in the garden. The sun was shining, the crocuses
were all to the mustard and there wasn't a sign of Heloise Pringle
anywhere. The cat was fooling about on the lawn, so I chirruped to it
and it gave a low gargle and came trotting up. I had just got it in my
arms and was scratching it under the ear when there was a loud shriek
from above, and there was Aunt Jane half out of the window. Dashed
disturbing.

'Oh, right-ho,' I said.

I dropped the cat, which galloped off into the bushes, and dismissing
the idea of bunging a brick at the aged relative, went on my way,
heading for the shrubbery. Once safely hidden there, I worked round
till I got to the summer-house. And, believe me, I had hardly got my
first cigarette nicely under way when a shadow fell on my book and
there was young Sticketh-Closer-Than-a-Brother in person.

'So there you are,' she said.

She seated herself by my side, and with a sort of gruesome playfulness
jerked the gasper out of the holder and heaved it through the door.

'You're always smoking,' she said, a lot too much like a lovingly
chiding young bride for my comfort. 'I wish you wouldn't. It's so bad
for you. And you ought not to be sitting out here without your light
overcoat. You want someone to look after you.'

'I've got Jeeves.'

She frowned a bit.

'I don't like him,' she said.

'Eh? Why not?'

'I don't know. I wish you would get rid of him.'

My flesh absolutely crept. And I'll tell you why. One of the first
things Honoria Glossop had done after we had become engaged was to tell
me she didn't like Jeeves and wanted him shot out. The realization that
this girl resembled Honoria not only in body but in blackness of soul
made me go all faint.

'What are you reading?'

She picked up my book and frowned again. The thing was one I had
brought down from the old flat in London, to glance at in the train--a
fairly zippy effort in the detective line called _The Trail of Blood_.
She turned the pages with a nasty sneer.

'I can't understand you liking nonsense of this--' She stopped
suddenly. 'Good gracious!'

'What's the matter?'

'Do you know Bertie Wooster?'

And then I saw that my name was scrawled right across the title page,
and my heart did three back somersaults.

'Oh--er--well--that is to say--well, slightly.'

'He must be a perfect horror. I'm surprised that you can make a friend
of him. Apart from anything else, the man is practically an imbecile.
He was engaged to my Cousin Honoria at one time, and it was broken off
because he was next door to insane. You should hear my Uncle Roderick
talk about him!'

I wasn't keen.

'Do you see much of him?'

'A goodish bit.'

'I saw in the paper the other day that he was fined for making a
disgraceful disturbance in the street.'

'Yes, I saw that.'

She gazed at me in a foul, motherly way.

'He can't be a good influence for you,' she said. 'I do wish you would
drop him. Will you?'

'Well--' I began. And at this point old Cuthbert, the cat, having
presumably found it a bit slow by himself in the bushes, wandered in
with a matey expression on his face and jumped on my lap. I welcomed
him with a good deal of cordiality. Though but a cat, he did make a
sort of third at this party; and he afforded a good excuse for changing
the conversation.

'Jolly birds, cats,' I said.

She wasn't having any.

'Will you drop Bertie Wooster?' she said, absolutely ignoring the cat
_motif_.

'It would be so difficult.'

'Nonsense! It only needs a little will-power. The man surely can't be
so interesting a companion as all that. Uncle Roderick says he is an
invertebrate waster.'

I could have mentioned a few things that I thought Uncle Roderick was,
but my lips were sealed, so to speak.

'You have changed a great deal since we last met,' said the Pringle
disease reproachfully. She bent forward and began to scratch the cat
under the other ear. 'Do you remember, when we were children together,
you used to say that you would do anything for me?'

'Did I?'

'I remember once you cried because I was cross and wouldn't let you
kiss me.'

I didn't believe it at the time, and I don't believe it now. Sippy is
in many ways a good deal of a chump, but surely even at the age of ten
he cannot have been such a priceless ass as that. I think the girl
was lying, but that didn't make the position of affairs any better. I
edged away a couple of inches and sat staring before me, the old brow
beginning to get slightly bedewed.

And then suddenly--well, you know how it is, I mean. I suppose everyone
has had that ghastly feeling at one time or another of being urged by
some overwhelming force to do some absolutely blithering act. You get
it every now and then when you're in a crowded theatre, and something
seems to be egging you on to shout 'Fire!' and see what happens. Or
you're talking to someone and all at once you feel, 'Now, suppose I
suddenly biffed this bird in the eye!'

Well, what I'm driving at is this, at this juncture, with her shoulder
squashing against mine and her black hair tickling my nose, a perfectly
loony impulse came sweeping over me to kiss her.

'No, really?' I croaked.

'Have you forgotten?'

She lifted the old onion and her eyes looked straight into mine. I
could feel myself skidding. I shut my eyes. And then from the doorway
there spoke the most beautiful voice I had ever heard in my life:

'Give me that cat!'

I opened my eyes. There was good old Aunt Jane, that queen of her sex,
standing before me, glaring at me as if I were a vivisectionist and she
had surprised me in the middle of an experiment. How this pearl among
women had tracked me down I don't know, but there she stood, bless her
dear, intelligent old soul, like the rescue party in the last reel of a
motion picture.

I didn't wait. The spell was broken and I legged it. As I went, I heard
that lovely voice again.

'He shot arrows at my Tibby from a bow,' said this most deserving and
excellent octogenarian.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the next few days all was peace. I saw comparatively little of
Heloise. I found the strategic value of that water-pipe outside my
window beyond praise. I seldom left the house now by any other route.
It seemed to me that, if only the luck held like this, I might after
all be able to stick this visit out for the full term of the sentence.

But meanwhile, as they say in the movies--

The whole family appeared to be present and correct as I came down to
the drawing-room a couple of nights later. The Prof, Mrs Prof, the two
Exhibits and the girl Heloise were scattered about at intervals. The
cat slept on the rug, the canary in its cage. There was nothing, in
short, to indicate that this was not just one of our ordinary evenings.

'Well, well, well!' I said cheerily. 'Hullo-ullo-ullo!'

I always like to make something in the nature of an entrance speech, it
seeming to me to lend a chummy tone to the proceedings.

The girl Heloise looked at me reproachfully.

'Where have you been all day?' she asked.

'I went to my room after lunch.'

'You weren't there at five.'

'No. After putting in a spell of work on the good old colleges I went
for a stroll. Fellow must have exercise if he means to keep fit.'

'_Mens sana in corpore sano_,' observed the prof.

'I shouldn't wonder,' I said cordially.

At this point, when everything was going as sweet as a nut and I was
feeling on top of my form, Mrs Pringle suddenly socked me on the base
of the skull with a sandbag. Not actually, I don't mean. No, no. I
speak figuratively, as it were.

'Roderick is very late,' she said.

You may think it strange that the sound of that name should have
sloshed into my nerve centres like a half-brick. But, take it from me,
to a man who has had any dealings with Sir Roderick Glossop there is
only one Roderick in the world--and that is one too many.

'Roderick?' I gurgled.

'My brother-in-law, Sir Roderick Glossop, comes to Cambridge tonight,'
said the prof. 'He lectures at St Luke's tomorrow. He is coming here to
dinner.'

And while I stood there, feeling like the hero when he discovers that
he is trapped in the den of the Secret Nine, the door opened.

'Sir Roderick Glossop,' announced the maid or some such person, and in
he came.

One of the things that get this old crumb so generally disliked among
the better element of the community is the fact that he has a head like
the dome of St Paul's and eyebrows that want bobbing or shingling to
reduce them to anything like reasonable size. It is a nasty experience
to see this bald and bushy bloke advancing on you when you haven't
prepared the strategic railways in your rear.

As he came into the room I backed behind a sofa and commended my soul
to God. I didn't need to have my hand read to know that trouble was
coming to me through a dark man.

He didn't spot me at first. He shook hands with the prof and wife,
kissed Heloise and waggled his head at the Exhibits.

'I fear I am somewhat late,' he said. 'A slight accident on the road,
affecting what my chauffeur termed the--'

And then he saw me lurking on the outskirts and gave a startled grunt,
as if I hurt him a good deal internally.

'This--' began the prof, waving in my direction.

'I am already acquainted with Mr Wooster.'

'This,' went on the prof, 'is Miss Sipperley's nephew, Oliver. You
remember Miss Sipperley?'

'What do you mean?' barked Sir Roderick. Having had so much to do
with loonies has given him a rather sharp and authoritative manner on
occasion. 'This is that wretched young man, Bertram Wooster. What is
all this nonsense about Olivers and Sipperleys?'

The prof was eyeing me with some natural surprise. So were the others.
I beamed a bit weakly.

'Well, as a matter of fact--' I said.

The prof was wrestling with the situation. You could hear his brain
buzzing.

'He said he was Oliver Sipperley,' he moaned.

'Come here!' bellowed Sir Roderick. 'Am I to understand that you have
inflicted yourself on this household under the pretence of being the
nephew of an old friend?'

It seemed a pretty accurate description of the facts.

'Well--er--yes,' I said.

Sir Roderick shot an eye at me. It entered the body somewhere about the
top stud, roamed around inside for a bit and went out at the back.

'Insane! Quite insane, as I knew from the first moment I saw him.'

'What did he say?' asked Aunt Jane.

'Roderick says this young man is insane,' roared the prof.

'Ah!' said Aunt Jane, nodding. 'I thought so. He climbs down
water-pipes.'

'Does what?'

'I've seen him--ah, many a time!'

Sir Roderick snorted violently.

'He ought to be under proper restraint. It is abominable that a person
in his mental condition should be permitted to roam the world at large.
The next stage may quite easily be homicidal.'

It seemed to me that, even at the expense of giving old Sippy away, I
must be cleared of this frightful charge. After all, Sippy's number was
up anyway.

'Let me explain,' I said. 'Sippy asked me to come here.'

'What do you mean?'

'He couldn't come himself, because he was jugged for biffing a cop on
Boat-Race Night.'

Well, it wasn't easy to make them get the hang of the story, and even
when I'd done it it didn't seem to make them any chummier towards me.
A certain coldness about expresses it, and when dinner was announced I
counted myself out and pushed off rapidly to my room. I could have done
with a bit of dinner, but the atmosphere didn't seem just right.

'Jeeves,' I said, having shot in and pressed the bell, 'we're sunk.'

'Sir?'

'Hell's foundations are quivering and the game is up.'

He listened attentively.

'The contingency was one always to have been anticipated as a
possibility, sir. It only remains to take the obvious step.'

'What's that?'

'Go and see Miss Sipperley, sir.'

'What on earth for?'

'I think it would be judicious to apprise her of the facts yourself,
sir, instead of allowing her to hear of them through the medium of a
letter from Professor Pringle. That is to say, if you are still anxious
to do all in your power to assist Mr Sipperley.'

'I can't let Sippy down. If you think it's any good--'

'We can but try it, sir. I have an idea, sir, that we may find Miss
Sipperley disposed to look leniently upon Mr Sipperley's misdemeanour.'

'What makes you think that?'

'It is just a feeling that I have, sir.'

'Well, if you think it would be worth trying--How do we get there?'

'The distance is about a hundred and fifty miles, sir. Our best plan
would be to hire a car.'

'Get it at once,' I said.

The idea of being a hundred and fifty miles away from Heloise Pringle,
not to mention Aunt Jane and Sir Roderick Glossop, sounded about as
good to me as anything I had ever heard.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Paddock, Beckley-on-the-Moor, was about a couple of parasangs
from the village, and I set out for it next morning, after partaking
of a hearty breakfast at the local inn, practically without a tremor.
I suppose when a fellow has been through it as I had in the last two
weeks his system becomes hardened. After all, I felt, whatever this
aunt of Sippy's might be like, she wasn't Sir Roderick Glossop, so I
was that much on velvet from the start.

The Paddock was one of those medium-sized houses with a goodish bit
of very tidy garden and a carefully rolled gravel drive curving past
a shrubbery that looked as if it had just come back from the dry
cleaner--the sort of house you take one look at and say to yourself,
'Somebody's aunt lives there.' I pushed on up the drive, and as I
turned the bend I observed in the middle distance a woman messing about
by a flower-bed with a trowel in her hand. If this wasn't the female I
was after, I was very much mistaken, so I halted, cleared the throat
and gave tongue.

'Miss Sipperley?'

She had had her back to me, and at the sound of my voice she executed
a sort of leap or bound, not unlike a barefoot dancer who steps on a
tin-tack half-way through the Vision of Salome. She came to earth and
goggled at me in a rather goofy manner. A large, stout female with a
reddish face.

'Hope I didn't startle you,' I said.

'Who are you?'

'My name's Wooster. I'm a pal of your nephew, Oliver.'

Her breathing had become more regular.

'Oh?' she said. 'When I heard your voice I thought you were someone
else.'

'No, that's who I am. I came up here to tell you about Oliver.'

'What about him?'

I hesitated. Now that we were approaching what you might call the nub,
or crux, of the situation, a good deal of my breezy confidence seemed
to have slipped from me.

'Well, it's rather a painful tale, I must warn you.'

'Oliver isn't ill? He hasn't had an accident?'

She spoke anxiously, and I was pleased at this evidence of human
feeling. I decided to shoot the works with no more delay.

'Oh, no, he isn't ill,' I said; 'and as regards having accidents, it
depends on what you call an accident. He's in chokey.'

'In what?'

'In prison.'

'In prison!'

'It was entirely my fault. We were strolling along on Boat-Race Night
and I advised him to pinch a policeman's helmet.'

'I don't understand.'

'Well, he seemed depressed, don't you know; and rightly or wrongly,
I thought it might cheer him up if he stepped across the street and
collared a policeman's helmet. He thought it a good idea, too, so he
started doing it, and the man made a fuss and Oliver sloshed him.'

'Sloshed him?'

'Biffed him--smote him a blow--in the stomach.'

'My nephew Oliver hit a policeman in the stomach?'

'Absolutely in the stomach. And next morning the beak sent him to the
bastille for thirty days without the option.'

I was looking at her a bit anxiously all this while to see how she was
taking the thing, and at this moment her face seemed suddenly to split
in half. For an instant she appeared to be all mouth, and then she
was staggering about the grass, shouting with laughter and waving the
trowel madly.

It seemed to me a bit of luck for her that Sir Roderick Glossop wasn't
on the spot. He would have been sitting on her head and calling for the
strait-waistcoat in the first half-minute.

'You aren't annoyed?' I said.

'Annoyed?' She chuckled happily. 'I've never heard such a splendid
thing in my life.'

I was pleased and relieved. I had hoped the news wouldn't upset her too
much, but I had never expected it to go with such a roar as this.

'I'm proud of him,' she said.

'That's fine.'

'If every young man in England went about hitting policemen in the
stomach, it would be a better country to live in.'

I couldn't follow her reasoning, but everything seemed to be all right;
so after a few more cheery words I said good-bye and legged it.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Jeeves,' I said when I got back to the inn, 'everything's fine. But I
am far from understanding why.'

'What actually occurred when you met Miss Sipperley, sir?'

'I told her Sippy was in the jug for assaulting the police. Upon which
she burst into hearty laughter, waved her trowel in a pleased manner
and said she was proud of him.'

'I think I can explain her apparently eccentric behaviour, sir. I
am informed that Miss Sipperley has had a good deal of annoyance at
the hands of the local constable during the past two weeks. This has
doubtless resulted in a prejudice on her part against the force as a
whole.'

'Really? How was that?'

'The constable has been somewhat over-zealous in the performance of
his duties, sir. On no fewer than three occasions in the last ten days
he has served summonses upon Miss Sipperley--for exceeding the speed
limit in her car; for allowing her dog to appear in public without a
collar; and for failing to abate a smoky chimney. Being in the nature
of an autocrat, if I may use the term, in the village, Miss Sipperley
has been accustomed to do these things in the past with impunity, and
the constable's unexpected zeal has made her somewhat ill-disposed
to policemen as a class and consequently disposed to look upon such
assaults as Mr Sipperley's in a kindly and broadminded spirit.'

I saw his point.

'What an amazing bit of luck, Jeeves!'

'Yes, sir.'

'Where did you hear all this?'

'My informant was the constable himself, sir. He is my cousin.'

I gaped at the man. I saw, so to speak, all.

'Good Lord, Jeeves! You didn't bribe him?'

'Oh, no, sir. But it was his birthday last week, and I gave him a
little present. I have always been fond of Egbert, sir.'

'How much?'

'A matter of five pounds, sir.'

I felt in my pocket.

'Here you are,' I said. 'And another fiver for luck.'

'Thank you very much, sir.'

'Jeeves,' I said, 'you move in a mysterious way your wonders to
perform. You don't mind if I sing a bit, do you?'

'Not at all, sir,' said Jeeves.




                       8--Fixing it for Freddie


'Jeeves,' I said, looking in on him one afternoon on my return from the
club, 'I don't want to interrupt you.'

'No, sir?'

'But I would like a word with you.'

'Yes, sir?'

He had been packing a few of the Wooster necessaries in the old kitbag
against our approaching visit to the seaside, and he now rose and stood
bursting with courteous zeal.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'a somewhat disturbing situation has arisen with
regard to a pal of mine.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'You know Mr Bullivant?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Well, I slid into the Drones this morning for a bite of lunch, and
found him in a dark corner of the smoking-room looking like the last
rose of summer. Naturally I was surprised. You know what a bright lad
he is as a rule. The life and soul of every gathering he attends.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Quite the little lump of fun, in fact.'

'Precisely, sir.'

'Well, I made inquiries, and he told me that he had had a quarrel with
the girl he's engaged to. You knew he was engaged to Miss Elizabeth
Vickers?'

'Yes, sir. I recall reading the announcement in the _Morning Post_.'

'Well, he isn't any longer. What the row was about he didn't say, but
the broad facts, Jeeves, are that she has scratched the fixture. She
won't let him come near her, refuses to talk on the phone, and sends
back his letters unopened.'

'Extremely trying, sir.'

'We ought to do something, Jeeves. But what?'

'It is somewhat difficult to make a suggestion, sir.'

'Well, what I'm going to do for a start is to take him down to Marvis
Bay with me. I know these birds who have been handed their hat by the
girl of their dreams, Jeeves. What they want is complete change of
scene.'

'There is much in what you say, sir.'

'Yes. Change of scene is the thing. I heard of a man. Girl refused him.
Man went abroad. Two months later girl wired him "Come back, Muriel."
Man started to write out a reply; suddenly found that he couldn't
remember girl's surname; so never answered at all, and lived happily
ever after. It may well be, Jeeves, that after Freddie Bullivant has
had a few weeks of Marvis Bay he will get completely over it.'

'Very possibly, sir.'

'And, if not, it is quite likely that, refreshed by sea air and good
simple food, you will get a brain-wave and think up some scheme for
bringing these two misguided blighters together again.'

'I will do my best, sir.'

'I knew it, Jeeves, I knew it. Don't forget to put in plenty of socks.'

'No, sir.'

'Also of tennis shirts not a few.'

'Very good, sir.'

I left him to his packing, and a couple of days later we started off
for Marvis Bay, where I had taken a cottage for July and August.

I don't know if you know Marvis Bay? It's in Dorsetshire; and, while
not what you would call a fiercely exciting spot, has many good points.
You spend the day there bathing and sitting on the sands, and in the
evening you stroll out on the shore with the mosquitoes. At nine p.m.
you rub ointment on the wounds and go to bed. It was a simple, healthy
life, and it seemed to suit poor old Freddie absolutely. Once the moon
was up and the breeze sighing in the trees, you couldn't drag him
from that beach with ropes. He became quite a popular pet with the
mosquitoes. They would hang round waiting for him to come out, and
would give a miss to perfectly good strollers just so as to be in good
condition for him.

It was during the day that I found Freddie, poor old chap, a trifle
heavy as a guest. I suppose you can't blame a bloke whose heart is
broken, but it required a good deal of fortitude to bear up against
this gloom-crushed exhibit during the early days of our little holiday.
When he wasn't chewing a pipe and scowling at the carpet, he was
sitting at the piano, playing 'The Rosary' with one finger. He couldn't
play anything except 'The Rosary', and he couldn't play much of that.
However firmly and confidently he started off, somewhere around the
third bar a fuse would blow out and he would have to start all over
again.

He was playing it as usual one morning when I came in from bathing: and
it seemed to me that he was extracting more hideous melancholy from it
even than usual. Nor had my sense deceived me.

'Bertie,' he said in a hollow voice, skidding on the fourth crotchet
from the left as you enter the second bar and producing a distressing
sound like the death-rattle of a sand-eel, 'I've seen her!'

'Seen her?' I said. 'What, Elizabeth Vickers? How do you mean, you've
seen her? She isn't down here.'

'Yes, she is. I suppose she's staying with relations or something. I
was down at the post office, seeing if there were any letters, and we
met in the doorway.'

'What happened?'

'She cut me dead.'

He started 'The Rosary' again, and stubbed his finger on a semi-quaver.

'Bertie,' he said, 'you ought never to have brought me here. I must go
away.'

'Go away? Don't talk such rot. This is the best thing that could have
happened. It's a most amazing bit of luck, her being down here. This is
where you come out strong.'

'She cut me.'

'Never mind. Be a sportsman. Have another dash at her.'

'She looked clean through me.'

'Well, don't mind that. Stick at it. Now, having got her down here,
what you want,' I said, 'is to place her under some obligation to you.
What you want is to get her timidly thanking you. What you want--'

'What's she going to thank me timidly for?'

I thought for a while. Undoubtedly he had put his finger on the nub of
the problem. For some moments I was at a loss, not to say nonplussed.
Then I saw the way.

'What you want,' I said, 'is to look out for a chance and save her from
drowning.'

'I can't swim.'

That was Freddie Bullivant all over. A dear old chap in a thousand
ways, but no help to a fellow, if you know what I mean.

He cranked up the piano once more, and I legged it for the open.

I strolled out on the beach and began to think this thing over. I would
have liked to consult Jeeves, of course, but Jeeves had disappeared for
the morning. There was no doubt that it was hopeless expecting Freddie
to do anything for himself in this crisis. I'm not saying that dear old
Freddie hasn't got his strong qualities. He is good at polo, and I have
heard him spoken of as a coming man at snooker-pool. But apart from
this you couldn't call him a man of enterprise.

Well, I was rounding some rocks, thinking pretty tensely, when I caught
sight of a blue dress, and there was the girl in person. I had never
met her, but Freddie had sixteen photographs of her sprinkled round
his bedroom, and I knew I couldn't be mistaken. She was sitting on the
sand, helping a small, fat child to build a castle. On a chair close
by was an elderly female reading a novel. I heard the girl call her
'aunt'. So, getting the reasoning faculties to work, I deduced that the
fat child must be her cousin. It struck me that if Freddie had been
there he would probably have tried to work up some sentiment about the
kid on the strength of it. I couldn't manage this. I don't think I ever
saw a kid who made me feel less sentimental. He was one of those round,
bulging kids.

After he had finished his castle he seemed to get bored with life and
began to cry. The girl, who seemed to read him like a book, took him
off to where a fellow was selling sweets at a stall. And I walked on.

Now, those who know me, if you ask them, will tell you that I'm a
chump. My Aunt Agatha would testify to this effect. So would my
Uncle Percy and many more of my nearest and--if you like to use the
expression--dearest. Well, I don't mind. I admit it. I _am_ a chump.
But what I do say--and I should like to lay the greatest possible
stress on this--is that every now and then, just when the populace has
given up hope that I will ever show any real human intelligence--I
get what it is idle to pretend is not an inspiration. And that's what
happened now. I doubt if the idea that came to me at this juncture
would have occurred to a single one of any dozen of the largest-brained
blokes in history. Napoleon might have got it, but I'll bet Darwin and
Shakespeare and Thomas Hardy wouldn't have thought of it in a thousand
years.

It came to me on my return journey. I was walking back along the
shore, exercising the old bean fiercely, when I saw the fat child
meditatively smacking a jelly-fish with a spade. The girl wasn't with
him. The aunt wasn't with him. In fact, there wasn't anybody else in
sight. And the solution of the whole trouble between Freddie and his
Elizabeth suddenly came to me in a flash.

From what I had seen of the two, the girl was evidently fond of this
kid: and, anyhow, he was her cousin, so what I said to myself was this:
If I kidnap this young heavyweight for a brief space of time: and if,
when the girl has got frightfully anxious about where he can have got
to, dear old Freddie suddenly appears leading the infant by the hand
and telling a story to the effect that he found him wandering at large
about the country and practically saved his life, the girl's gratitude
is bound to make her chuck hostilities and be friends again.

So I gathered up the kid and made off with him.

Freddie, dear old chap, was rather slow at first in getting on to the
fine points of the idea. When I appeared at the cottage, carrying
the child, and dumped him down in the sitting-room, he showed no joy
whatever. The child had started to bellow by this time, not thinking
much of the thing, and Freddie seemed to find it rather trying.

'What the devil's all this?' he asked, regarding the little visitor
with a good deal of loathing.

The kid loosed off a yell that made the windows rattle, and I saw that
this was a time for strategy. I raced to the kitchen and fetched a pot
of honey. It was the right idea. The kid stopped bellowing and began to
smear his face with the stuff.

'Well?' said Freddie, when silence had set in.

I explained the scheme. After a while it began to strike him. The
careworn look faded from his face, and for the first time since his
arrival at Marvis Bay he smiled almost happily.

'There's something in this, Bertie.'

'It's the goods.'

'I think it will work,' said Freddie.

And, disentangling the child from the honey, he led him out.

'I expect Elizabeth will be on the beach somewhere,' he said.

What you might call a quiet happiness suffused me, if that's the word I
want. I was very fond of old Freddie, and it was jolly to think that he
was shortly about to click once more. I was leaning back in a chair on
the veranda, smoking a peaceful cigarette, when down the road I saw the
old boy returning, and, by George, the kid was still with him.

'Hallo!' I said. 'Couldn't you find her?'

I then perceived that Freddie was looking as if he had been kicked in
the stomach.

'Yes, I found her,' he replied, with one of those bitter, mirthless
laughs you read about.

'Well, then--?'

He sank into a chair and groaned.

'This isn't her cousin, you idiot,' he said. 'He's no relation at
all--just a kid she met on the beach. She had never seen him before in
her life.'

'But she was helping him build a sand-castle.'

'I don't care. He's a perfect stranger.'

It seemed to me that, if the modern girl goes about building
sand-castles with kids she has only known for five minutes and probably
without a proper introduction at that, then all that has been written
about her is perfectly true. Brazen is the word that seems to meet the
case.

I said as much to Freddie, but he wasn't listening.

'Well, who is this ghastly child, then?' I said.

'I don't know. O Lord, I've had a time! Thank goodness you will
probably spend the next few years of your life in Dartmoor for
kidnapping. That's my only consolation. I'll come and jeer at you
through the bars on visiting days.'

'Tell me all, old man,' I said.

He told me all. It took him a good long time to do it, for he broke
off in the middle of nearly every sentence to call me names, but I
gradually gathered what had happened. The girl Elizabeth had listened
like an iceberg while he worked off the story he had prepared, and
then--well, she didn't actually call him a liar in so many words, but
she gave him to understand in a general sort of way that he was a worm
and an outcast. And then he crawled off with the kid, licked to a
splinter.

'And mind,' he concluded, 'this is your affair. I'm not mixed up in it
at all. If you want to escape your sentence--or anyway get a portion of
it remitted--you'd better go and find the child's parents and return
him before the police come for you.'

'Who are his parents?'

'I don't know.'

'Where do they live?'

'I don't know.'

The kid didn't seem to know, either. A thoroughly vapid and uninformed
infant. I got out of him the fact that he had a father, but that was as
far as he went. It didn't seem ever to have occurred to him, chatting
of an evening with the old man, to ask him his name and address. So,
after a wasted ten minutes, out we went into the great world, more or
less what you might call at random.

I give you my word that, until I started to tramp the place with this
child, I never had a notion that it was such a difficult job restoring
a son to his parents. How kidnappers ever get caught is a mystery to
me. I searched Marvis Bay like a bloodhound, but nobody came forward
to claim the infant. You would have thought, from the lack of interest
in him, that he was stopping there all by himself in a cottage of
his own. It wasn't till, by another inspiration, I thought to ask
the sweet-stall man that I got on the track. The sweet-stall man,
who seemed to have seen a lot of him, said that the child's name was
Kegworthy, and that his parents lived at a place called Ocean Rest.

It then remained to find Ocean Rest. And eventually, after visiting
Ocean View, Ocean Prospect, Ocean Breeze, Ocean Cottage, Ocean
Bungalow, Ocean Nook and Ocean Homestead, I trailed it down.

I knocked at the door. Nobody answered. I knocked again. I could hear
movements inside, but nobody appeared. I was just going to get to work
with that knocker in such a way that it would filter through these
people's heads that I wasn't standing there just for the fun of the
thing, when a voice from somewhere above shouted 'Hi!'

I looked up and saw a round, pink face, with grey whiskers east and
west of it, staring down at me from an upper window.

'Hi!' it shouted again. 'You can't come in.'

'I don't want to come in.'

'Because--Oh, is that Tootles?'

'My name is not Tootles. Are you Mr Kegworthy? I've brought back your
son.'

'I see him. Peep-bo, Tootles, Dadda can see 'oo.'

The face disappeared with a jerk. I could hear voices. The face
reappeared.

'Hi!'

I churned the gravel madly. This blighter was giving me the pip.

'Do you live here?' asked the face.

'I have taken a cottage here for a few weeks.'

'What's your name?'

'Wooster.'

'Fancy that! Do you spell it W-o-r-c-e-s-t-e-r or W-o-o-s-t-e-r?'

'W-o-o--'

'I ask because I once knew a Miss Wooster, spelled W-o--'

I had had about enough of this spelling-bee.

'Will you open the door and take this child in?'

'I mustn't open the door. This Miss Wooster that I knew married a man
named Spenser. Was she any relation?'

'She is my Aunt Agatha,' I replied, and I spoke with a good deal of
bitterness, trying to suggest by my manner that he was exactly the sort
of man, in my opinion, who would know my Aunt Agatha.

He beamed down at me.

'This is most fortunate. We were wondering what to do with Tootles.
You see, we have mumps here. My daughter Bootles has just developed
mumps. Tootles must not be exposed to the risk of infection. We could
not think what to do with him. It was most fortunate, your finding the
dear child. He strayed from his nurse. I would hesitate to trust him to
a stranger, but you are different. Any nephew of Mrs Spenser's has my
complete confidence. You must take Tootles into your house. It will be
an ideal arrangement. I have written to my brother in London to come
and fetch him. He may be here in a few days.'

'May!'

'He is a busy man, of course; but he should certainly be here within
a week. Till then Tootles can stop with you. It is an excellent plan.
Very much obliged to you. Your wife will like Tootles.'

'I haven't got a wife!' I yelled; but the window had closed with a
bang, as if the man with the whiskers had found a germ trying to escape
and had headed it off just in time.

I breathed a deep breath and wiped the old forehead.

The window flew up again.

'Hi!'

A package weighing about a ton hit me on the head and burst like a bomb.

'Did you catch it?' said the face, reappearing. 'Dear me, you missed
it. Never mind. You can get it at the grocer's. Ask for Bailey's
Granulated Breakfast Chips. Tootles takes them for breakfast with a
little milk. Not cream. Milk. Be sure to get Bailey's.'

'Yes, but--'

The face disappeared, and the window was banged down again. I lingered
a while, but nothing else happened, so, taking Tootles by the hand, I
walked slowly away.

And as we turned up the road we met Freddie's Elizabeth.

'Well, baby?' she said, sighting the kid. 'So daddy found you again,
did he? Your little son and I made great friends on the beach this
morning,' she said to me.

This was the limit. Coming on top of that interview with the whiskered
lunatic, it so utterly unnerved me that she had nodded good-bye and was
half-way down the road before I caught up with my breath enough to deny
the charge of being the infant's father.

       *       *       *       *       *

I hadn't expected Freddie to sing with joy when he saw me looming up
with child complete, but I did think he might have showed a little more
manly fortitude, a little more of the old British bulldog spirit. He
leaped up when we came in, glared at the kid and clutched his head. He
didn't speak for a long time; but, to make up for it, when he began he
did not leave off for a long time.

'Well,' he said, when he had finished the body of his remarks, 'say
something! Heavens, man, why don't you say something?'

'If you'll give me a chance, I will,' I said, and shot the bad news.

'What are you going to do about it?' he asked. And it would be idle to
deny that his manner was peevish.

'What can we do about it?'

'We? What do you mean, we? I'm not going to spend my time taking turns
as a nursemaid to this excrescence. I'm going back to London.'

'Freddie!' I cried. 'Freddie, old man!' My voice shook. 'Would you
desert a pal at a time like this?'

'Yes, I would.'

'Freddie,' I said, 'you've got to stand by me. You must. Do you realize
that this child has to be undressed, and bathed, and dressed again? You
wouldn't leave me to do all that single-handed?'

'Jeeves can help you.'

'No, sir,' said Jeeves, who had just rolled in with lunch; 'I must,
I fear, disassociate myself completely from the matter.' He spoke
respectfully but firmly. 'I have had little or no experience with
children.'

'Now's the time to start,' I urged.

'No, sir,--I am sorry to say that I cannot involve myself in any way.'

'Then you must stand by me, Freddie.'

'I won't.'

'You must. Reflect, old man! We have been pals for years. Your mother
likes me.'

'No, she doesn't.'

'Well, anyway, we were at school together and you owe me a tenner.'

'Oh, well,' he said in a resigned sort of voice.

'Besides, old thing,' I said, 'I did it all for your sake, you know.'

He looked at me in a curious way, and breathed rather hard for some
moments.

'Bertie,' he said, 'one moment. I will stand a good deal, but I will
not stand being expected to be grateful.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Looking back at it, I can see that what saved me from Colney Hatch in
this crisis was my bright idea in buying up most of the contents of
the local sweet-shop. By serving out sweets to the kid practically
incessantly we managed to get through the rest of that day pretty
satisfactorily. At eight o'clock he fell asleep in a chair; and, having
undressed him by unbuttoning every button in sight and, where there
were no buttons, pulling till something gave, we carried him up to bed.

Freddie stood looking at the pile of clothes on the floor with a sort
of careworn wrinkle between his eyes, and I knew what he was thinking.
To get the kid undressed had been simple--a mere matter of muscle.
But how were we to get him into his clothes again? I stirred the heap
with my foot. There was a long linen arrangement which might have been
anything. Also a strip of pink flannel which was like nothing on earth.
All most unpleasant.

But in the morning I remembered that there were children in the next
bungalow but one, and I went there before breakfast and borrowed their
nurse. Women are wonderful, by Jove they are! This nurse had all the
spare parts assembled and in the right places in about eight minutes,
and there was the kid dressed and looking fit to go to a garden party
at Buckingham Palace. I showered wealth upon her, and she promised to
come in morning and evening. I sat down to breakfast almost cheerful
again. It was the first bit of silver lining that had presented itself
to date.

'And, after all,' I said, 'there's lots to be argued in favour of
having a child about the place, if you know what I mean. Kind of cosy
and domestic, what?'

Just then the kid upset the milk over Freddie's trousers, and when he
had come back after changing he lacked sparkle.

It was shortly after breakfast that Jeeves asked if he could have a
word in my ear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, though in the anguish of recent events I had rather tended to
forget what had been the original idea in bringing Freddie down to
this place, I hadn't forgotten it altogether; and I'm bound to say
that, as the days went by, I had found myself a little disappointed
in Jeeves. The scheme had been, if you recall, that he should refresh
himself with sea air and simple food and, having thus got his brain
into prime working order, evolve some means of bringing Freddie and his
Elizabeth together again.

And what had happened? The man had eaten well and he had slept well,
but not a step did he appear to have taken towards bringing about the
happy ending. The only move that had been made in that direction had
been made by me, alone and unaided; and, though I freely admit that it
had turned out a good deal of a bloomer, still the fact remains that I
had shown zeal and enterprise. Consequently I received him with a bit
of hauteur when he blew in. Slightly cold. A trifle frosty.

'Yes, Jeeves?' I said. 'You wished to speak to me?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Say on, Jeeves,' I said.

'Thank you, sir. What I desired to say, sir, was this: I attended a
performance at the local cinema last night.'

I raised the eyebrows. I was surprised at the man. With life in the
home so frightfully tense and the young master up against it to such a
fearful extent, I disapproved of him coming toddling in and prattling
about his amusements.

'I hope you enjoyed yourself,' I said in rather a nasty manner.

'Yes, sir, thank you. The management was presenting a super-super-film
in seven reels, dealing with life in the wilder and more feverish
strata of New York Society, featuring Bertha Blevitch, Orlando Murphy
and Baby Bobbie. I found it most entertaining, sir.'

'That's good,' I said. 'And if you have a nice time this morning on the
sands with your spade and bucket, you will come and tell me all about
it, won't you? I have so little on my mind just now that it's a treat
to hear all about your happy holiday.'

Satirical, if you see what I mean. Sarcastic. Almost bitter, as a
matter of fact, if you come right down to it.

'The title of the film was _Tiny Hands_, sir. And the father and mother
of the character played by Baby Bobbie had unfortunately drifted
apart--'

'Too bad,' I said.

'Although at heart they loved each other still, sir.'

'Did they really? I'm glad you told me that.'

'And so matters went on, sir, till came a day when--'

'Jeeves,' I said, fixing him with a dashed unpleasant eye, 'what the
dickens do you think you're talking about? Do you suppose that, with
this infernal child landed on me and the peace of the home practically
shattered into a million bits, I want to hear--'

'I beg your pardon, sir. I would not have mentioned this cinema
performance were it not for the fact that it gave me an idea, sir.'

'An idea!'

'An idea that will, I fancy, sir, prove of value in straightening out
the matrimonial future of Mr Bullivant. To which end, if you recollect,
sir, you desired me to--'

I snorted with remorse.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'I wronged you.'

'Not at all, sir.'

'Yes, I did. I wronged you. I had a notion that you had given yourself
up entirely to the pleasures of the seaside and had chucked that
business altogether. I might have known better. Tell me all, Jeeves.'

He bowed in a gratified manner. I beamed. And, while we didn't actually
fall on each other's necks, we gave each other to understand that all
was well once more.

'In this super-super-film _Tiny Hands_, sir,' said Jeeves, 'the parents
of the child had, as I say, drifted apart.'

'Drifted apart,' I said, nodding. 'Right! And then?'

'Came a day, sir, when their little child brought them together again.'

'How?'

'If I remember rightly, sir, he said, "Dadda, doesn't 'oo love mummie
no more?"'

'And then?'

'They exhibited a good deal of emotion. There was what I believe is
termed a cut-back, showing scenes from their courtship and early
married life and some glimpses of Lovers Through the Ages, and the
picture concluded with a close-up of the pair in an embrace, with
the child looking on with natural gratification and an organ playing
"Hearts and Flowers" in the distance.'

'Proceed, Jeeves,' I said. 'You interest me strangely. I begin to grasp
the idea. You mean--?'

'I mean, sir, that, with this young gentleman on the premises, it might
be possible to arrange a _dénouement_ of a somewhat similar nature in
regard to Mr Bullivant and Miss Vickers.'

'Aren't you overlooking the fact that this kid is no relation of Mr
Bullivant or Miss Vickers?'

'Even with that handicap, sir, I fancy that good results might ensue. I
think that, if it were possible to bring Mr Bullivant and Miss Vickers
together for a short space of time in the presence of the child, sir,
and if the child were to say something of a touching nature--'

'I follow you absolutely, Jeeves,' I cried with enthusiasm. 'It's big.
This is the way I see it. We lay the scene in this room. Child, centre.
Girl, l.c. Freddie up stage, playing the piano. No, that won't do.
He can only play a little of "The Rosary" with one finger, so we'll
have to cut out the soft music. But the rest's all right. Look here,'
I said. 'This inkpot is Miss Vickers. This mug with "A Present from
Marvis Bay" on it is the child. This penwiper is Mr Bullivant. Start
with dialogue leading up to child's line. Child speaks line, let us
say, "Boofer lady, does 'oo love dadda?" Business of outstretched
hands. Hold picture for a moment. Freddie crosses l. takes girl's hand.
Business of swallowing lump in throat. Then big speech: "Ah, Elizabeth,
has not this misunderstanding of ours gone on too long? See! A little
child rebukes us!" And so on. I'm just giving you the general outline.
Freddie must work up his own part. And we must get a good line for the
child. "Boofer lady, does 'oo love dadda?" isn't definite enough. We
want something more--'

'If I might make the suggestion, sir--?'

'Yes?'

'I would advocate the words "Kiss Freddie!" It is short, readily
memorized, and has what I believe is technically termed the punch.'

'Genius, Jeeves!'

'Thank you very much, sir.'

'"Kiss Freddie!" it is, then. But, I say, Jeeves, how the deuce are
we to get them together in here? Miss Vickers cuts Mr Bullivant. She
wouldn't come within a mile of him.'

'It is awkward, sir.'

'It doesn't matter. We shall have to make it an exterior set instead
of an interior. We can easily corner her on the beach somewhere, when
we're ready. Meanwhile, we must get the kid word-perfect.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Right! First rehearsal for lines and business at eleven sharp tomorrow
morning.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Poor old Freddie was in such a gloomy frame of mind that I decided
not to tell him the idea till we had finished coaching the child. He
wasn't in the mood to have a thing like that hanging over him. So we
concentrated on Tootles. And pretty early in the proceedings we saw
that the only way to get Tootles worked up to the spirit of the thing
was to introduce sweets of some sort as a sub-motive, so to speak.

'The chief difficulty, sir,' said Jeeves, at the end of the first
rehearsal, 'is, as I envisage it, to establish in the young gentleman's
mind a connexion between the words we desire him to say and the
refreshment.'

'Exactly,' I said. 'Once the blighter has grasped the basic fact that
these two words, clearly spoken, result automatically in chocolate
nougat, we have got a success.'

I've often thought how interesting it must be to be one of those
animal-trainer blokes--to stimulate the dawning intelligence and all
that. Well, this was every bit as exciting. Some days success seemed to
be staring us in the eyeball, and the kid got out the line as if he had
been an old professional. And then he would go all to pieces again. And
time was flying.

'We must hurry up, Jeeves,' I said. 'The kid's uncle may arrive any day
now and take him away.'

'Exactly, sir.'

'And we have no understudy.'

'Very true, sir.'

'We must work! I must say this child is a bit discouraging at times. I
should have thought a deaf-mute would have learned his part by now.'

I will say this for the kid, though: he was a trier. Failure didn't
damp him. Whenever there was any kind of sweet in sight he had a dash
at his line, and kept saying something till he had got what he was
after. His chief fault was his uncertainty. Personally, I would have
been prepared to risk opening in the act and was ready to start the
public performance at the first opportunity, but Jeeves said no.

'I would not advocate undue haste, sir,' he said. 'As long as the young
gentleman's memory refuses to act with any certainty, we are running
grave risks of failure. Today, if you recollect, sir, he said "Kick
Freddie!" That is not a speech to win a young lady's heart, sir.'

'No. And she might do it, too. You're right. We must postpone
production.'

But, by Jove, we didn't! The curtain went up the very next afternoon.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was nobody's fault--certainly not mine. It was just fate. Jeeves was
out, and I was alone in the house with Freddie and the child. Freddie
had just settled down at the piano, and I was leading the kid out of
the place for a bit of exercise, when, just as we'd got on to the
veranda, along came the girl Elizabeth on her way to the beach. And at
the sight of her the kid set up a matey yell, and she stopped at the
foot of the steps.

'Hallo, baby,' she said. 'Good morning,' she said to me. 'May I come
up?'

She didn't wait for an answer. She just hopped on to the veranda. She
seemed to be that sort of girl. She started fussing over the child. And
six feet away, mind you, Freddie smiting the piano in the sitting-room.
It was a dashed disturbing situation, take it from Bertram. At any
minute Freddie might take it into his head to come out on the veranda,
and I hadn't even begun to rehearse him in his part.

I tried to break up the scene.

'We were just going down to the beach,' I said.

'Yes?' said the girl. She listened for a moment. 'So you're having your
piano tuned?' she said. 'My aunt has been trying to find a tuner for
ours. Do you mind if I go in and tell this man to come on to us when he
has finished here?'

I mopped the brow.

'Er--I shouldn't go in just now,' I said. 'Not just now, while he's
working, if you don't mind. These fellows can't bear to be disturbed
when they're at work. It's the artistic temperament. I'll tell him
later.'

'Very well. Ask him to call at Pine Bungalow. Vickers is the name....
Oh, he seems to have stopped. I suppose he will be out in a minute now.
I'll wait.'

'Don't you think--shouldn't you be getting on to the beach?' I said.

She had started talking to the kid and didn't hear. She was feeling in
her bag for something.

'The beach,' I babbled.

'See what I've got for you, baby,' said the girl. 'I thought I might
meet you somewhere, so I bought some of your favourite sweets.'

And, by Jove, she held up in front of the kid's bulging eyes, a chunk
of toffee about the size of the Albert Memorial!

That finished it. We had just been having a long rehearsal, and the kid
was all worked up in his part. He got it right first time.

'Kiss Fweddie!' he shouted.

And the French windows opened and Freddie came out on to the veranda,
for all the world as if he had been taking a cue.

'Kiss Fweddie!' shrieked the child.

Freddie looked at the girl, and the girl looked at him. I looked at the
ground, and the kid looked at the toffee.

'Kiss Fweddie!' he yelled. 'Kiss Fweddie!'

'What does this mean?' said the girl, turning on me.

'You'd better give it him,' I said. 'He'll go on till you do, you know.'

She gave the kid the toffee and he subsided. Freddie, poor ass, still
stood there gaping, without a word.

'What does it mean?' said the girl again. Her face was pink, and her
eyes were sparkling in the sort of way, don't you know, that makes a
fellow feel as if he hadn't any bones in him, if you know what I mean.
Yes, Bertram felt filleted. Did you ever tread on your partner's dress
at a dance--I'm speaking now of the days when women wore dresses long
enough to be trodden on--and hear it rip and see her smile at you like
an angel and say, '_Please_ don't apologize. It's nothing,' and then
suddenly meet her clear blue eyes and feel as if you had stepped on the
teeth of a rake and had the handle jump up and hit you in the face?
Well, that's how Freddie's Elizabeth looked.

'_Well!_' she said, and her teeth gave a little click.

I gulped. Then I said it was nothing. Then I said it was nothing much.
Then I said, 'Oh, well, it was this way.' And I told her all about it.
And all the while Idiot Freddie stood there gaping, without a word. Not
one solitary yip had he let out of himself from the start.

And the girl didn't speak, either. She just stood listening.

And then she began to laugh. I never heard a girl laugh so much. She
leaned against the side of the veranda and shrieked. And all the while
Freddie, the World's Champion Dumb Brick, standing there, saying
nothing.

Well, I finished my story and sidled to the steps. I had said all I
had to say, and it seemed to me that about here the stage-direction
'exit cautiously' was written in my part. I gave poor old Freddie up in
despair. If only he had said a word it might have been all right. But
there he stood speechless.

Just out of sight of the house I met Jeeves, returning from his stroll.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'all is over. The thing's finished. Poor dear old
Freddie has made a complete ass of himself and killed the whole show.'

'Indeed, sir? What has actually happened?'

I told him.

'He fluffed in his lines,' I concluded. 'Just stood there saying
nothing, when if ever there was a time for eloquence, this was it.
He ... Great Scott! Look!'

We had come back within view of the cottage, and there in front of it
stood six children, a nurse, two loafers, another nurse, and the fellow
from the grocer's. They were all staring. Down the road came galloping
five more children, a dog, three men and a boy, all about to stare.
And on our porch, as unconscious of the spectators as if they had been
alone in the Sahara, stood Freddie and his Elizabeth, clasped in each
other's arms.

'Great Scott!' I said.

'It would appear, sir,' said Jeeves, 'that everything has concluded
most satisfactorily, after all.'

'Yes. Dear old Freddie may have been fluffy in his lines,' I said, 'but
his business certainly seems to have gone with a bang.'

'Very true, sir,' said Jeeves.




                    9--Clustering Round Young Bingo


I blotted the last page of my manuscript and sank back, feeling more or
less of a spent force. After incredible sweat of the old brow the thing
seemed to be in pretty fair shape, and I was just reading it through
and debating whether to bung in another paragraph at the end, when
there was a tap at the door and Jeeves appeared.

'Mrs Travers, sir, on the telephone.'

'Oh?' I said. Preoccupied, don't you know.

'Yes, sir. She presents her compliments and would be glad to know what
progress you have made with the article which you are writing for her.'

'Jeeves, can I mention men's knee-length underclothing in a woman's
paper?'

'No, sir.'

'Then tell her it's finished.'

'Very good, sir.'

'And, Jeeves, when you're through, come back. I want you to cast your
eye over this effort and give it the OK.'

My Aunt Dahlia, who runs a woman's paper called _Milady's Boudoir_, had
recently backed me into a corner and made me promise to write her a
few authoritative words for her 'Husbands and Brothers' page on 'What
the Well-Dressed Man is Wearing'. I believe in encouraging aunts, when
deserving; and, as there are many worse eggs than her knocking about
the metrop, I had consented blithely. But I give you my honest word
that if I had had the foggiest notion of what I was letting myself in
for, not even a nephew's devotion would have kept me from giving her
the raspberry. A deuce of a job it had been, taxing the physique to
the utmost. I don't wonder now that all these author blokes have bald
heads and faces like birds who have suffered.

'Jeeves,' I said, when he came back, 'you don't read a paper called
_Milady's Boudoir_ by any chance, do you?'

'No, sir. The periodical has not come to my notice.'

'Well, spring sixpence on it next week, because this article will
appear in it. Wooster on the well-dressed man, don't you know.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'Yes, indeed, Jeeves. I've rather extended myself over this little
bijou. There's a bit about socks that I think you will like.'

He took the manuscript, brooded over it, and smiled a gentle, approving
smile.

'The sock passage is quite in the proper vein, sir,' he said.

'Well expressed, what?'

'Extremely, sir.'

I watched him narrowly as he read on, and, as I was expecting, what
you might call the love-light suddenly died out of his eyes. I braced
myself for an unpleasant scene.

'Come to the bit about soft silk shirts for evening wear?' I asked
carelessly.

'Yes, sir,' said Jeeves, in a low, cold voice, as if he had been bitten
in the leg by a personal friend. 'And if I may be pardoned for saying
so--'

'You don't like it?'

'No, sir. I do not. Soft silk shirts with evening costume are not worn,
sir.'

'Jeeves,' I said, looking the blighter diametrically in the centre of
the eyeball, 'they're dashed well going to be. I may as well tell you
now that I have ordered a dozen of those shirtings from Peabody and
Simms, and it's no good looking like that, because I am jolly well
adamant.'

'If I might--'

'No, Jeeves,' I said, raising my hand, 'argument is useless. Nobody has
a greater respect than I have for your judgement in socks, in ties,
and--I will go farther--in spats; but when it comes to evening shirts
your nerve seems to fail you. You have no vision. You are prejudiced
and reactionary. Hidebound is the word that suggests itself. It may
interest you to learn that when I was at Le Touquet the Prince of Wales
buzzed into the Casino one night with soft silk shirt complete.'

'His Royal Highness, sir, may permit himself a certain licence which in
your own case--'

'No, Jeeves,' I said firmly, 'it's no use. When we Woosters are
adamant, we are--well, adamant, if you know what I mean.'

'Very good, sir.'

I could see the man was wounded, and, of course, the whole episode had
been extremely jarring and unpleasant; but these things have to be gone
through. Is one a serf or isn't one? That's what it all boils down to.
Having made my point, I changed the subject.

'Well, that's that,' I said. 'We now approach another topic. Do you
know any housemaids, Jeeves?'

'Housemaids, sir?'

'Come, come, Jeeves, you know what housemaids are.'

'Are you requiring a housemaid, sir?'

'No, but Mr Little is. I met him at the club a couple of days ago, and
he told me that Mrs Little is offering rich rewards to anybody who will
find her one guaranteed to go light on the china.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'Yes. The one now in office apparently runs through the _objets d'art_
like a typhoon, simoom, or sirocco. So if you know any--'

'I know a great many, sir. Some intimately, others mere acquaintances.'

'Well, start digging round among the old pals. And now the hat, the
stick, and other necessaries. I must be getting along and handing in
this article.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The offices of _Milady's Boudoir_ were in one of those rummy streets in
the Covent Garden neighbourhood; and I had just got to the door, after
wading through a deep top-dressing of old cabbages and tomatoes, when
who should come out but Mrs Little. She greeted me with the warmth due
to the old family friend, in spite of the fact that I hadn't been round
to the house for a goodish while.

'Whatever are you doing in these parts, Bertie? I thought you never
came east of Leicester Square.'

'I've come to deliver an article of sorts which my Aunt Dahlia asked
me to write. She edits a species of journal up those stairs. _Milady's
Boudoir_.'

'What a coincidence! I have just promised to write an article for her,
too.'

'Don't you do it,' I said earnestly. 'You've simply no notion what a
ghastly labour--Oh, but, of course, I was forgetting. You're used to
it, what?'

Silly of me to have talked like that. Young Bingo Little, if you
remember, had married the famous female novelist, Rosie M. Banks,
author of some of the most pronounced and widely read tripe ever put on
the market. Naturally a mere article would be pie for her.

'No, I don't think it will give me much trouble,' she said. 'Your aunt
has suggested a most delightful subject.'

'That's good. By the way, I spoke to my man Jeeves about getting you a
housemaid. He knows all the hummers.'

'Thank you so much. Oh, are you doing anything tomorrow night?'

'Not a thing.'

'Then do come and dine with us. Your aunt is coming, and hopes to bring
your uncle. I am looking forward to meeting him.'

'Thanks. Delighted.'

I mean it, too. The Little household may be weak on housemaids, but it
is right there when it comes to cooks. Somewhere or other some time ago
Bingo's missus managed to dig up a Frenchman of the most extraordinary
vim and skill. A most amazing Johnnie who dishes a wicked _ragout_.
Old Bingo has put on at least ten pounds in weight since this fellow
Anatole arrived in the home.

'At eight, then.'

'Right. Thanks ever so much.'

She popped off, and I went upstairs to hand in my copy, as we boys of
the Press call it. I found Aunt Dahlia immersed to the gills in papers
of all descriptions.

I am not much of a lad for my relatives as a general thing, but
I've always been very pally with Aunt Dahlia. She married my Uncle
Thomas--between ourselves a bit of a squirt--the year Bluebottle won
the Cambridgeshire; and they hadn't got half way down the aisle before
I was saying to myself, 'That woman is much too good for the old bird.'
Aunt Dahlia is a large, genial soul, the sort you see in dozens on the
hunting field. As a matter of fact, until she married Uncle Thomas, she
put in most of her time on horseback; but he won't live in the country,
so nowadays she expends her energy on this paper of hers.

She came to the surface as I entered, and flung a cheery look at my
head.

'Hullo, Bertie! I say, have you really finished that article?'

'To the last comma.'

'Good boy! My gosh, I'll bet it's rotten.'

'On the contrary, it is extremely hot stuff, and most of it approved by
Jeeves, what's more. The bit about soft silk shirts got in amongst him
a trifle; but you can take it from me, Aunt Dahlia, that they are the
latest yodel and will be much seen at first nights and other occasions
where Society assembles.'

'Your man Jeeves,' said Aunt Dahlia, flinging the article into a basket
and skewering a few loose pieces of paper on a sort of meat hook, 'is a
washout, and you can tell him I said so.'

'Oh, come,' I said. 'He may not be sound on shirtings--'

'I'm not referring to that. As long as a week ago I asked him to get me
a cook, and he hasn't found one yet.'

'Great Scott! Is Jeeves a domestic employment agency? Mrs Little wants
him to find her a housemaid. I met her outside. She tells me she's
doing something for you.'

'Yes, thank goodness. I'm relying on it to bump the circulation up a
bit. I can't read her stuff myself, but women love it. Her name on the
cover will mean a lot. And we need it.'

'Paper not doing well?'

'It's doing all right really, but it's got to be a slow job building up
a circulation.'

'I suppose so.'

'I can get Tom to see that in his lucid moments,' said Aunt Dahlia,
skewering a few more papers. 'But just at present the poor fathead has
got one of his pessimistic spells. It's entirely due to that mechanic
who calls herself a cook. A few more of her alleged dinners, and Tom
will refuse to go on paying the printers' bills.'

'You don't mean that!'

'I do mean it. There was what she called a _ris de veau à la
financière_ last night which made him talk for three-quarters of an
hour about good money going to waste and nothing to show for it.'

I quite understood, and I was dashed sorry for her. My Uncle Thomas
is a cove who made a colossal pile of money out in the East, but in
doing so put his digestion on the blink. This has made him a tricky
proposition to handle. Many a time I've lunched with him and found him
perfectly chirpy up to the fish, only to have him turn blue on me well
before the cheese.

Who was that lad they used to try to make me read at Oxford?
Ship--Shop--Schopenhauer. That's the name. A grouch of the most
pronounced description. Well, Uncle Thomas, when his gastric juices
have been giving him the elbow, can make Schopenhauer look like
Pollyanna. And the worst of it is, from Aunt Dahlia's point of view,
that on these occasions he always seems to think he's on the brink of
ruin and wants to start to economize.

'Pretty tough,' I said. 'Well, anyway, he'll get one good dinner
tomorrow night at the Littles'.'

'Can you guarantee that, Bertie?' asked Aunt Dahlia earnestly. 'I
simply daren't risk unleashing him on anything at all wonky.'

'They've got a marvellous cook. I haven't been round there for some
time, but unless he's lost his form of two months ago Uncle Thomas is
going to have the treat of a lifetime.'

'It'll only make it all the worse for him, coming back to our
steak-incinerator,' said Aunt Dahlia, a bit on the Schopenhauer side
herself.

       *       *       *       *       *

The little nest where Bingo and his bride had settled themselves was
up in St John's Wood; one of those rather jolly houses with a bit of
garden. When I got there on the following night, I found that I was
the last to weigh in. Aunt Dahlia was chatting with Rosie in a corner,
while Uncle Thomas, standing by the mantelpiece with Bingo, sucked down
a cocktail in a frowning, suspicious sort of manner, rather like a
chappie having a short snort before dining with the Borgias: as if he
were saying to himself that, even if this particular cocktail wasn't
poisoned, he was bound to cop it later on.

Well, I hadn't expected anything in the nature of beaming _joie de
vivre_ from Uncle Thomas, so I didn't pay much attention to him. What
did surprise me was the extraordinary gloom of young Bingo. You may say
what you like against Bingo, but nobody has ever found him a depressing
host. Why, many a time in the days of his bachelorhood I've known him
to start throwing bread before the soup course. Yet now he and Uncle
Thomas were a pair. He looked haggard and careworn, like a Borgia who
has suddenly remembered that he has forgotten to shove cyanide in the
_consommé_, and the dinner gong due any moment.

And the mystery wasn't helped at all by the one remark he made to me
before conversation became general. As he poured out my cocktail, he
suddenly bent forward.

'Bertie,' he whispered, in a nasty, feverish manner, 'I want to see
you. Life and death matter. Be in tomorrow morning.'

That was all. Immediately after that the starting-gun went and we
toddled down to the festive. And from that moment, I'm bound to say,
in the superior interests of the proceedings he rather faded out of
my mind. For good old Anatole, braced presumably by the fact of there
being guests, had absolutely surpassed himself.

I am not a man who speaks hastily in these matters. I weigh my words.
And I say again that Anatole had surpassed himself. It was as good a
dinner as I have ever absorbed, and it revived Uncle Thomas like a
watered flower. As we sat down he was saying some things about the
Government which they wouldn't have cared to hear. With the _consommé
pâté d'Italie_ he said but what could you expect nowadays? With the
_paupiettes de sole à la princesse_ he admitted rather decently that
the Government couldn't be held responsible for the rotten weather,
anyway. And shortly after the _caneton Aylesbury à la broche_ he was
practically giving the lads the benefit of his whole-hearted support.

And all the time young Bingo looking like an owl with a secret sorrow.
Rummy!

I thought about it a good deal as I walked home, and I was hoping he
wouldn't roll round with his hard-luck story too early in the morning.
He had the air of one who intends to charge in at about six-thirty.

Jeeves was waiting up for me when I got back.

'A pleasant dinner, sir?' he said.

'Magnificent, Jeeves.'

'I am glad to hear that, sir. Mr George Travers rang up on the
telephone shortly after you had left. He was extremely desirous that
you should join him at Harrogate, sir. He leaves for that town by an
early train tomorrow.'

My Uncle George is a festive old bird who has made a habit for years
of doing himself a dashed sight too well, with the result that he's
always got Harrogate or Buxton hanging over him like the sword of
what's-his-name. And he hates going there alone.

'It can't be done,' I said. Uncle George is bad enough in London, and
I wasn't going to let myself be cooped up with him in one of these
cure-places.

'He was extremely urgent, sir.'

'No, Jeeves,' I said firmly. 'I am always anxious to oblige, but Uncle
George--no, no! I mean to say, what?'

'Very good, sir,' said Jeeves.

It was a pleasure to hear the way he said it. Docile the man was
becoming, absolutely docile. It just showed that I had been right in
putting my foot down about those shirts.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Bingo showed up next morning I had had breakfast and was all ready
for him. Jeeves shot him into the presence, and he sat down on the bed.

'Good morning, Bertie,' said young Bingo.

'Good morning, old thing,' I replied courteously.

'Don't go, Jeeves,' said young Bingo hollowly. 'Wait.'

'Sir?'

'Remain. Stay. Cluster round. I shall need you.'

'Very good, sir.'

Bingo lit a cigarette and frowned bleakly at the wallpaper.

'Bertie,' he said, 'the most frightful calamity has occurred. Unless
something is done, and done right speedily, my social prestige is
doomed, my self-respect will be obliterated, my name will be mud, and I
shall not dare to show my face in the West End of London again.'

'My aunt!' I cried, deeply impressed.

'Exactly,' said young Bingo, with a hollow laugh. 'You have put it in a
nutshell. The whole trouble is due to your blasted aunt.'

'Which blasted aunt? Specify, old thing. I have so many.'

'Mrs Travers. The one who runs that infernal paper.'

'Oh, no, dash it, old man,' I protested. 'She's the only decent aunt
I've got. Jeeves, you will bear me out in this?'

'Such has always been my impression, I must confess, sir.'

'Well, get rid of it, then,' said young Bingo. 'The woman is a menace
to society, a home-wrecker, and a pest. Do you know what's she's done?
She's got Rosie to write an article for that rag of hers.'

'I know that.'

'Yes, but you don't know what it's about.'

'No. She only told me Aunt Dahlia had given her a splendid idea for the
thing.'

'It's about me!'

'You?'

'Yes, me! Me! And do you know what it's called? It is called "How I
Keep the Love of My Husband-Baby".'

'My what?'

'Husband-baby!'

'What's a husband-baby?'

'I am, apparently,' said young Bingo, with much bitterness. 'I am also,
according to this article, a lot of other things which I have too
much sense of decency to repeat even to an old friend. This beastly
composition, in short, is one of those things they call "human interest
stories"; one of those intimate revelations of married life over which
the female public loves to gloat; all about Rosie and me and what
she does when I come home cross, and so on. I tell you, Bertie, I am
still blushing all over at the recollection of something she says in
paragraph two.'

'What?'

'I decline to tell you. But you can take it from me that it's the edge.
Nobody could be fonder of Rosie than I am, but--dear, sensible girl as
she is in ordinary life--the moment she gets in front of a dictating
machine she becomes absolutely maudlin. Bertie, that article must not
appear!'

'But--'

'If it does I shall have to resign from my clubs, grow a beard, and
become a hermit. I shall not be able to face the world.'

'Aren't you pitching it a bit strong, old lad?' I said. 'Jeeves, don't
you think he's pitching it a bit strong?'

'Well, sir--'

'I am pitching it feebly,' said young Bingo earnestly. 'You haven't
heard the thing. I have. Rosie shoved the cylinder on the dictating
machine last night before dinner, and it was grisly to hear the
instrument croaking out those awful sentences. If that article appears
I shall be kidded to death by every pal I've got. Bertie,' he said, his
voice sinking to a hoarse whisper, 'you have about as much imagination
as a warthog, but surely even you can picture to yourself what Jimmy
Bowles and Tuppy Rogers, to name only two, will say when they see me
referred to in print as "half god, half prattling, mischievous child"?'

I jolly well could.

'She doesn't say that?' I gasped.

'She certainly does. And when I tell you that I selected that
particular quotation because it's about the only one I can stand
hearing spoken, you will realize what I'm up against.'

       *       *       *       *       *

I picked at the coverlet. I had been a pal of Bingo's for many years,
and we Woosters stand by our pals.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'you have heard?'

'Yes, sir.'

'The position is serious.'

'Yes, sir.'

'We must cluster round.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Does anything suggest itself to you?'

'Yes, sir.'

'What! You don't really mean that?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Bingo,' I said, 'the sun is still shining. Something suggests itself
to Jeeves.'

'Jeeves,' said young Bingo in a quivering voice, 'if you see me through
this fearful crisis, ask of me what you will even unto half my kingdom.'

'The matter,' said Jeeves, 'fits in very nicely, sir, with another
mission which was entrusted to me this morning.'

'What do you mean?'

'Mrs Travers rang me up on the telephone shortly before I brought you
your tea, sir, and was most urgent that I should endeavour to persuade
Mr Little's cook to leave Mr Little's service and join her staff. It
appears that Mr Travers was fascinated by the man's ability, sir, and
talked far into the night of his astonishing gifts.'

Young Bingo uttered a frightful cry of agony.

'What! Is that--that buzzard trying to pinch our cook?'

'Yes, sir.'

'After eating our bread and salt, dammit?'

'I fear, sir,' sighed Jeeves, 'that when it comes to a matter of cooks,
ladies have but a rudimentary sense of morality.'

'Half a second, Bingo,' I said, as the fellow seemed about to plunge
into something of an oration. 'How does this fit in with the other
thing, Jeeves?'

'Well, sir, it has been my experience that no lady can ever forgive
another lady for taking a really good cook away from her. I am
convinced that, if I am able to accomplish the mission which Mrs
Travers entrusted to me, an instant breach of cordial relations must
inevitably ensue. Mrs Little will, I feel certain, be so aggrieved with
Mrs Travers that she will decline to contribute to her paper. We shall
therefore not only bring happiness to Mr Travers, but also suppress
the article. Thus killing two birds with one stone, if I may use the
expression, sir.'

'Certainly you may use the expression, Jeeves,' I said cordially. 'And
I may add that in my opinion this is one of your best and ripest.'

'Yes, but I say, you know,' bleated young Bingo. 'I mean to say--old
Anatole, I mean--what I'm driving at is that he's a cook in a million.'

'You poor chump, if he wasn't there would be no point in the scheme.'

'Yes, but what I mean--I shall miss him, you know. Miss him fearfully.'

'Good heavens!' I cried. 'Don't tell me that you are thinking of your
tummy in a crisis like this?'

Bingo sighed heavily.

'Oh, all right,' he said. 'I suppose it's a case of the surgeon's
knife. All right, Jeeves, you may carry on. Yes, carry on, Jeeves. Yes,
yes, Jeeves, carry on. I'll look in tomorrow morning and hear what you
have to report.'

And with bowed head young Bingo biffed off.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was bright and early next morning. In fact, he turned up at such an
indecent hour that Jeeves very properly refused to allow him to break
in on my slumbers.

By the time I was awake and receiving, he and Jeeves had had a
heart-to-heart chat in the kitchen; and when Bingo eventually crept
into my room I could see by the look on his face that something had
gone wrong.

'It's all off,' he said, slumping down on the bed.

'Off?'

'Yes; that cook-pinching business. Jeeves tells me he saw Anatole last
night, and Anatole refused to leave.'

'But surely Aunt Dahlia had the sense to offer him more than he was
getting with you?'

'The sky was the limit, as far as she was concerned. Nevertheless, he
refused to skid. It seems he's in love with our parlourmaid.'

'But you haven't got a parlourmaid.'

'We have got a parlourmaid.'

'I've never seen her. A sort of bloke who looked like a provincial
undertaker waited at table the night before last.'

'That was the local greengrocer, who comes to help out when desired.
The parlourmaid is away on her holiday--or was till last night. She
returned about ten minutes before Jeeves made his call, and Anatole, I
take it, was in such a state of elation and devotion and what-not on
seeing her again that the contents of the Mint wouldn't have bribed him
to part from her.'

'But look here, Bingo,' I said, 'this is all rot. I see the solution
right off. I'm surprised that a bloke of Jeeves's mentality overlooked
it. Aunt Dahlia must engage the parlourmaid as well as Anatole. Then
they won't be parted.'

'I thought of that, too. Naturally.'

'I bet you didn't.'

'I certainly did.'

'Well, what's wrong with the scheme?'

'It can't be worked. If your aunt engaged our parlourmaid she would
have to sack her own, wouldn't she?'

'Well?'

'Well, if she sacks her parlourmaid, it will mean that the chauffeur
will quit. He's in love with her.'

'With my aunt?'

'No, with the parlourmaid. And apparently he's the only chauffeur your
uncle has ever found who drives carefully enough for him.'

I gave it up. I had never imagined before that life below stairs was so
frightfully mixed up with what these coves call the sex complex. The
personnel of domestic staffs seemed to pair off like characters in a
musical comedy.

'Oh!' I said. 'Well, that being so, we do seem to be more or less
stymied. That article will have to appear after all, what?'

'No, it won't.'

'Has Jeeves thought of another scheme?'

'No, but I have.' Bingo bent forward and patted my knee affectionately.
'Look here, Bertie,' he said, 'you and I were at school together.
You'll admit that?'

'Yes, but--'

'And you're a fellow who never lets a pal down. That's well known,
isn't it?'

'Yes, but listen--'

'You'll cluster round. Of course you will. As if,' said Bingo with a
scornful laugh, 'I ever doubted it! You won't let an old school-friend
down in his hour of need. Not you. Not Bertie Wooster. No, no!'

'Yes, but just one moment. What is this scheme of yours?'

Bingo massaged my shoulder soothingly.

'It's something right in your line, Bertie, old man; something that'll
come as easy as pie to you. As a matter of fact, you've done very much
the same thing before--that time you were telling me about when you
pinched your uncle's Memoirs at Easeby. I suddenly remembered that, and
it gave me the idea. It's--'

'Here! Listen!'

'It's all settled, Bertie. Nothing for you to worry about. Nothing
whatever. I see now that we made a big mistake in ever trying to tackle
this job in Jeeves's silly, roundabout way. Much better to charge
straight ahead without any of that finesse and fooling about. And so--'

'Yes, but listen--'

'And so this afternoon I'm going to take Rosie to a matinee. I shall
leave the window of her study open, and when we have got well away you
will climb in, pinch the cylinder and pop off again. It's absurdly
simple--'

'Yes, but half a second--'

'I know what you are going to say,' said Bingo, raising his hand. 'How
are you to find the cylinder? That's what is bothering you, isn't it?
Well, it will be quite easy. Not a chance of a mistake. The thing is
in the top left-hand drawer of the desk, and the drawer will be left
unlocked because Rosie's stenographer is to come round at four o'clock
and type the article.'

'Now listen, Bingo,' I said. 'I'm frightfully sorry for you and all
that, but I must firmly draw the line at burglary.'

'But, dash it, I'm only asking you to do what you did at Easeby.'

'No, you aren't. I was staying at Easeby. It was simply a case of
having to lift a parcel off the hall table. I hadn't got to break into
a house. I'm sorry but I simply will not break into your beastly house
on any consideration whatever.'

He gazed at me, astonished and hurt. 'Is this Bertie Wooster speaking?'
he said in a low voice.

'Yes, it is!'

'But, Bertie,' he said gently, 'we agreed that you were at school with
me.'

'I don't care.'

'At school, Bertie. The dear old school.'

'I don't care. I will not--'

'Bertie!'

'I will not--'

'Bertie!'

'No!'

'Bertie!'

'Oh, all right,' I said.

'There,' said young Bingo, patting me on the shoulder, 'spoke the true
Bertram Wooster!'

       *       *       *       *       *

I don't know if it has ever occurred to you, but to the thoughtful cove
there is something dashed reassuring in all the reports of burglaries
you read in the papers. I mean, if you're keen on Great Britain
maintaining her prestige and all that. I mean, there can't be much
wrong with the morale of a country whose sons go in to such a large
extent for housebreaking, because you can take it from me that the job
requires a nerve of the most cast-iron description. I suppose I was
walking up and down in front of that house for half an hour before I
could bring myself to dash in at the front gate and slide round to the
side where the study window was. And even then I stood for about ten
minutes cowering against the wall and listening for police-whistles.

Eventually, however, I braced myself up and got to business. The study
was on the ground floor and the window was nice and large, and, what is
more, wide open. I got the old knee over the sill, gave a jerk which
took an inch of skin off my ankle, and hopped down into the room. And
there I was, if you follow me.

I stood for a moment, listening. Everything seemed to be all right. I
was apparently alone in the world.

In fact, I was so much alone that the atmosphere seemed positively
creepy. You know how it is on these occasions. There was a clock on the
mantelpiece that ticked in a slow, shocked sort of way that was dashed
unpleasant. And over the clock a large portrait stared at me with a
good deal of dislike and suspicion. It was a portrait of somebody's
grandfather. Whether he was Rosie's or Bingo's I didn't know, but he
was certainly a grandfather. In fact, I wouldn't be prepared to swear
that he wasn't a great-grandfather. He was a big, stout old buffer in
a high collar that seemed to hurt his neck, for he had drawn his chin
back a goodish way and was looking down his nose as much as to say,
'You made me put this dam' thing on!'

Well, it was only a step to the desk, and nothing between me and it but
a brown shaggy rug; so I avoided grandfather's eye and, summoning up
the good old bulldog courage of the Woosters, moved forward and started
to navigate the rug. And I had hardly taken a step when the south-east
corner of it suddenly detached itself from the rest and sat up with a
snuffle.

Well, I mean to say, to bear yourself fittingly in the face of an
occurrence of this sort you want to be one of those strong, silent,
phlegmatic birds who are ready for anything. This type of bloke, I
imagine, would simply have cocked an eye at the rug, said to himself,
'Ah, a Pekingese dog, and quite a good one, too!' and started at once
to make cordial overtures to the animal in order to win its sympathy
and moral support. I suppose I must be one of the neurotic younger
generation you read about in the papers nowadays, because it was
pretty plain within half a second that I wasn't strong and I wasn't
phlegmatic. This wouldn't have mattered so much, but I wasn't silent
either. In the emotion of the moment I let out a sort of sharp yowl and
leaped about four feet in a north-westerly direction. And there was a
crash that sounded as though somebody had touched off a bomb.

What a female novelist wants with an occasional table in her study
containing a vase, two framed photographs, a saucer, a lacquer box,
and a jar of potpourri, I don't know; but that was what Bingo's Rosie
had, and I caught it squarely with my right hip and knocked it endways.
It seemed to me for a moment as if the whole world had dissolved into
a kind of cataract of glass and china. A few years ago, when I legged
it to America to elude my Aunt Agatha, who was out with her hatchet, I
remember going to Niagara and listening to the Falls. They made much
the same sort of row, but not so loud.

And at the same instant the dog began to bark.

It was a small dog--the sort of animal from which you would have
expected a noise like a squeaking slate-pencil; but it was simply
baying. It had retired into a corner, and was leaning against the wall
with bulging eyes; and every two seconds it chucked its head back in a
kind of pained way and let out another terrific bellow.

Well, I know when I'm licked. I was sorry for Bingo and regretted the
necessity of having to let him down; but the time had come, I felt, to
shift. 'Outside for Bertram!' was the slogan, and I took a running leap
at the window and scrambled through.

And there on the path, as if they had been waiting for me by
appointment, stood a policeman and a parlourmaid.

It was an embarrassing moment.

'Oh--er--there you are!' I said. And there was what you might call a
contemplative silence for a moment.

'I told you I heard something,' said the parlourmaid.

The policeman was regarding me in a boiled way.

'What's all this?' he asked.

I smiled in a sort of saint-like manner.

'It's a little hard to explain,' I said.

'Yes, it is!' said the policeman.

'I was just--er--just having a look round, you know. Old friend of the
family, you understand.'

'How did you get in?'

'Through the window. Being an old friend of the family, if you follow
me.'

'Old friend of the family, are you?'

'Oh, very. Very. Very old. Oh, a very old friend of the family.'

'I've never seen him before,' said the parlourmaid.

       *       *       *       *       *

I looked at the girl with positive loathing. How she could have
inspired affection in anyone, even a French cook, beat me. Not that she
was a bad-looking girl, mind you. Not at all. On another and happier
occasion I might even have thought her rather pretty. But now she
seemed one of the most unpleasant females I had ever encountered.

'No,' I said. 'You have never seen me before. But I'm an old friend of
the family.'

'Then why didn't you ring at the front door?'

'I didn't want to give any trouble.'

'It's no trouble answering front doors, that being what you're paid
for,' said the parlourmaid virtuously. 'I've never seen him before in
my life,' she added, perfectly gratuitously. A horrid girl.

'Well, look here,' I said, with an inspiration, 'the undertaker knows
me.'

'What undertaker?'

'The cove who was waiting at table when I dined here the night before
last.'

'Did the undertaker wait at table on the sixteenth instant?' asked the
policeman.

'Of course he didn't,' said the parlourmaid.

'Well, he looked like--By Jove, no. I remember now. He was the
greengrocer.'

'On the sixteenth instant,' said the policeman--pompous ass!--'did the
greengrocer--?'

'Yes, he did, if you want to know,' said the parlourmaid. She seemed
disappointed and baffled, like a tigress that sees its prey being
sneaked away from it. Then she brightened. 'But this fellow could
easily have found that out by asking round about.'

A perfectly poisonous girl.

'What's your name?' asked the policeman.

'Well, I say, do you mind awfully if I don't give my name, because--'

'Suit yourself. You'll have to tell it to the magistrate.'

'Oh, no, I say, dash it!'

'I think you'd better come along.'

'But I say, really, you know, I am an old friend of the family. Why, by
Jove, now I remember, there's a photograph of me in the drawing-room.
Well, I mean, that shows you!'

'If there is,' said the policeman.

'I've never seen it,' said the parlourmaid.

I absolutely hated this girl.

'You would have seen it if you had done your dusting more
conscientiously,' I said severely. And I meant it to sting, by Jove!

'It is not a parlourmaid's place to dust the drawing-room,' she sniffed
haughtily.

'No,' I said bitterly. 'It seems to be a parlourmaid's place to
lurk about and hang about and--er--waste her time fooling about in
the garden with policemen who ought to be busy about their duties
elsewhere.'

'It's a parlourmaid's place to open the front door to visitors. Them
that don't come in through windows.'

I perceived that I was getting the loser's end of the thing. I tried to
be conciliatory.

'My dear old parlourmaid,' I said, 'don't let us descend to vulgar
wrangling. All I'm driving at is that there is a photograph of me in
the drawing-room, cared for and dusted by whom I know not; and this
photograph will, I think, prove to you that I am an old friend of the
family. I fancy so, officer?'

'If it's there,' said the man in a grudging way.

'Oh, it's there all right. On, yes, it's there.'

'Well, we'll go to the drawing-room and see.'

'Spoken like a man, my dear old policeman,' I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The drawing-room was on the first floor, and the photograph was on
the table by the fireplace. Only, if you understand me, it wasn't.
What I mean is there was the fireplace, and there was the table by the
fireplace, but, by Jove, not a sign of any photograph of me whatsoever.
A photograph of Bingo, yes. A photograph of Bingo's uncle, Lord
Bittlesham, right. A photograph of Mrs Bingo, three-quarter face, with
a tender smile on her lips, all present and correct. But of anything
resembling Bertram Wooster, not a trace.

'Ho!' said the policeman.

'But, dash it, it was there the night before last.'

'Ho!' he said again. 'Ho! Ho!' As if he were starting a drinking-chorus
in a comic opera, confound him.

Then I got what amounted to the brain-wave of a lifetime.

'Who dusts these things?' I said, turning on the parlourmaid.

'I don't.'

'I didn't say you did. I said who did.'

'Mary. The housemaid, of course.'

'Exactly. As I suspected. As I foresaw. Mary, officer, is notoriously
the worst smasher in London. There have been complaints about her on
all sides. You see what has happened? The wretched girl has broken the
glass of my photograph and, not being willing to come forward and admit
it in an honest, manly way, has taken the thing off and concealed it
somewhere.'

'Ho!' said the policeman, still working through the drinking-chorus.

'Well, ask her. Go down and ask her.'

'You go down and ask her,' said the policeman to the parlourmaid. 'If
it's going to make him any happier.'

The parlourmaid left the room, casting a pestilential glance at me over
her shoulder as she went. I'm not sure she didn't say 'Ho!' too. And
then there was a bit of a lull. The policeman took up a position with a
large beefy back against the door, and I wandered to and fro and hither
and yonder.

'What are you playing at?' demanded the policeman.

'Just looking round. They may have moved the thing.'

'Ho!'

And then there was another bit of a lull. And suddenly I found myself
by the window, and, by Jove, it was six inches open at the bottom. And
the world beyond looked so bright and sunny and--Well, I don't claim
that I am a particularly swift thinker, but once more something seemed
to whisper 'Outside for Bertram!' I slid my finger nonchalantly under
the sash, gave a hefty heave, and up she came. And the next moment I
was in a laurel bush, feeling like the cross which marks the spot where
the accident occurred.

A large red face appeared in the window. I got up and skipped lightly
to the gate.

'Hi!' shouted the policeman.

'Ho!' I replied, and went forth, moving well.

'This,' I said to myself, as I hailed a passing cab and sank back on
the cushions, 'is the last time I try to do anything for young Bingo!'

       *       *       *       *       *

These sentiments I expressed in no guarded language to Jeeves when I
was back in the old flat with my feet on the mantelpiece, pushing down
a soothing whisky-and.

'Never again, Jeeves!' I said. 'Never again!'

'Well, sir--'

'No, never again!'

'Well, sir--'

'What do you mean, "Well, sir"? What are you driving at?'

'Well, sir, Mr Little is an extremely persistent young gentleman, and
yours, if I may say so, sir, is a yielding and obliging nature--'

'You don't think that young Bingo would have the immortal rind to try
to get me into some other foul enterprise?'

'I should say that it was more than probable, sir.'

I removed the dogs swiftly from the mantelpiece, and jumped up, all of
a twitter.

'Jeeves, what would you advise?'

'Well, sir, I think a little change of scene would be judicious.'

'Do a bolt?'

'Precisely, sir. If I might suggest it, sir, why not change your mind
and join Mr George Travers at Harrogate?'

'Oh, I say, Jeeves!'

'You would be out of what I might describe as the danger zone there,
sir.'

'Perhaps you're right, Jeeves,' I said thoughtfully. 'Yes, possibly
you're right. How far is Harrogate from London?'

'Two hundred and six miles, sir.'

'Yes, I think you're right. Is there a train this afternoon?'

'Yes, sir. You could catch it quite easily.'

'All right, then. Bung a few necessaries in a bag.'

'I have already done so, sir.'

'Ho!' I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

It's a rummy thing, but when you come down to it Jeeves is always
right. He had tried to cheer me up at the station by saying that I
would not find Harrogate unpleasant, and, by Jove, he was perfectly
correct. What I had overlooked, when examining the project, was the
fact that I should be in the middle of a bevy of blokes who were taking
the cure and I shouldn't be taking it myself. You've no notion what a
dashed cosy, satisfying feeling that gives a fellow.

I mean to say, there was old Uncle George, for instance. The
medicine-man, having given him the once-over, had ordered him to
abstain from all alcoholic liquids, and in addition to tool down the
hill to the Royal Pump-Room each morning at eight-thirty and imbibe
twelve ounces of warm crescent saline and magnesia. It doesn't sound
much, put that way, but I gather from contemporary accounts that it's
practically equivalent to getting outside a couple of little old last
year's eggs beaten up in sea-water. And the thought of Uncle George,
who had oppressed me sorely in my childhood, sucking down that stuff
and having to hop out of bed at eight-fifteen to do so was extremely
grateful and comforting of a morning.

At four in the afternoon he would toddle down the hill again and repeat
the process, and at night we would dine together and I would loll back
in my chair, sipping my wine, and listen to him telling me what the
stuff had tasted like. In many ways the ideal existence.

I generally managed to fit it in with my engagements to go down and
watch him tackle his afternoon dose, for we Woosters are as fond of a
laugh as anyone. And it was while I was enjoying the performance in the
middle of the second week that I heard my name spoken. And there was
Aunt Dahlia.

'Hallo!' I said. 'What are you doing here?'

'I came down yesterday with Tom.'

'Is Tom taking the cure?' asked Uncle George, looking up hopefully from
the hell-brew.

'Yes.'

'Are you taking the cure?'

'Yes.'

'Ah!' said Uncle George, looking happier than I had seen him for days.
He swallowed the last drops, and then, the programme calling for a
brisk walk before his massage, left us.

'I shouldn't have thought you would have been able to get away from
the paper,' I said. 'I say,' I went on, struck by a pleasing idea. 'It
hasn't bust up, has it?'

'Bust up? I should say not. A pal of mine is looking after it for me
while I'm here. It's right on its feet now. Tom has given me a couple
of thousand and says there's more if I want it, and I've been able
to buy the serial rights of Lady Bablockhythe's _Frank Recollections
of a Long Life_. The hottest stuff, Bertie. Certain to double the
circulation and send half the best-known people in London into
hysterics for a year.'

'Oh!' I said. 'Then you're pretty well fixed, what? I mean, what with
the Frank Recollections and that article of Mrs Little's.'

Aunt Dahlia was drinking something that smelled like a leak in the
gas-pipe, and I thought for a moment that it was that that made her
twist up her face. But I was wrong.

'Don't mention that woman to me, Bertie!' she said. 'One of the worst.'

'But I thought you were rather pally.'

'No longer. Will you credit it that she positively refuses to let me
have that article--'

'What!'

'--purely and simply on account of some fancied grievance she thinks
she has against me because her cook left her and came to me.'

I couldn't follow this at all.

'Anatole left her?' I said. 'But what about the parlourmaid?'

'Pull yourself together, Bertie. You're babbling. What do you mean?'

'Why, I understood--'

'I'll bet you never understood anything in your life.' She laid down
her empty glass. 'Well, that's done!' she said with relief. 'Thank
goodness, I'll be able to watch Tom drinking his in a few minutes.
It's the only thing that enables me to bear up. Poor old chap, he does
hate it so! But I cheer him by telling him it's going to put him in
shape for Anatole's cooking. And that, Bertie, is something worth going
into training for. A master of his art, that man. Sometimes I'm not
altogether surprised that Mrs Little made such a fuss when he went.
But, really, you know, she ought not to mix sentiment with business.
She has no right to refuse to let me have that article just because of
a private difference. Well, she jolly well can't use it anywhere else,
because it was my idea and I have witnesses to prove it. If she tries
to sell it to another paper, I'll sue her. And, talking of sewers, it's
high time Tom was here to drink his sulphur-water.'

'But look here--'

'Oh, by the way, Bertie,' said Aunt Dahlia, 'I withdraw any harsh
expressions I may have used about your man Jeeves. A most capable
feller!'

'Jeeves?'

'Yes; he attended to the negotiations. And very well he did it, too.
And he hasn't lost by it, you can bet. I saw to that. I'm grateful to
him. Why, if Tom gives up a couple of thousand now, practically without
a murmur, the imagination reels at what he'll do with Anatole cooking
regularly for him. He'll be signing cheques in his sleep.'

I got up. Aunt Dahlia pleaded with me to stick around and watch Uncle
Tom in action, claiming it to be a sight nobody should miss, but I
couldn't wait. I rushed up the hill, left a farewell note for Uncle
George, and caught the next train for London.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Jeeves,' I said, when I had washed off the stains of travel, 'tell me
frankly all about it. Be as frank as Lady Bablockhythe.'

'Sir?'

'Never mind, if you've not heard of her. Tell me how you worked
this binge. The last I heard was that Anatole loved that
parlourmaid--goodness knows why!--so much that he refused to leave her.
Well, then?'

'I was somewhat baffled for a while, I must confess, sir. Then I was
materially assisted by a fortunate discovery.'

'What was that?'

'I chanced to be chatting with Mrs Travers's housemaid, sir, and,
remembering that Mrs Little was anxious to obtain a domestic of that
description, I asked her if she would consent to leave Mrs Travers and
go at an advanced wage to Mrs Little. To this she assented, and I saw
Mrs Little and arranged the matter.'

'Well? What was the fortunate discovery?'

'That the girl, in a previous situation some little time back, had
been a colleague of Anatole, sir. And Anatole, as is the too frequent
practice of these Frenchmen, had made love to her. In fact, they were,
so I understand it, sir, formally affianced until Anatole disappeared
one morning, leaving no address, and passed out of the poor girl's
life. You will readily appreciate that this discovery simplified
matters considerably. The girl no longer had any affection for Anatole,
but the prospect of being under the same roof with two young persons,
both of whom he had led to assume--'

'Great Scott! Yes, I see! It was rather like putting in a ferret to
start a rabbit.'

'The principle was much the same, sir. Anatole was out of the house
and in Mrs Travers's service within half an hour of the receipt of the
information that the young person was about to arrive. A volatile man,
sir. Like so many of these Frenchmen.'

'Jeeves,' I said, 'this is genius of a high order.'

'It is very good of you to say so, sir.'

'What did Mr Little say about it?'

'He appeared gratified, sir.'

'To go into sordid figures, did he--'

'Yes, sir. Twenty pounds. Having been fortunate in his selections at
Hurst Park on the previous Saturday.'

'My aunt told me that she--'

'Yes, sir. Most generous. Twenty-five pounds.'

'Good Lord, Jeeves! You've been coining the stuff!'

'I have added appreciably to my savings, yes, sir. Mrs Little was
good enough to present me with ten pounds for finding her such a
satisfactory housemaid. And then there was Mr Travers--'

'Uncle Thomas?'

'Yes, sir. He also behaved most handsomely, quite independently of Mrs
Travers. Another twenty-five pounds. And Mr George Travers--'

'Don't tell me that Uncle George gave you something, too! What on earth
for?'

'Well, really, sir, I do not quite understand myself. But I received a
cheque for ten pounds from him. He seemed to be under the impression
that I had been in some way responsible for your joining him at
Harrogate, sir.'

I gaped at the fellow.

'Well, everybody seems to be doing it,' I said, 'so I suppose I had
better make the thing unanimous. Here's a fiver.'

'Why, thank you, sir. This is extremely--'

'It won't seem much compared with these vast sums you've been
acquiring.'

'Oh, I assure you, sir.'

'And I don't know why I'm giving it to you.'

'No, sir.'

'Still, there it is.'

'Thank you very much, sir.'

I got up.

'It's pretty late,' I said, 'but I think I'll dress and go out and have
a bite somewhere. I feel like having a whirl of some kind after two
weeks at Harrogate.'

'Yes, sir. I will unpack your clothes.'

'Oh, Jeeves,' I said, 'did Peabody and Simms send those soft silk
shirts?'

'Yes, sir. I sent them back.'

'Sent them back!'

'Yes, sir.'

I eyed him for a moment. But I mean to say. I mean, what's the use?

'Oh, all right,' I said. 'Then lay out one of the gents' stiff-bosomed.'

'Very good, sir,' said Jeeves.




                      10--Bertie Changes his Mind


It has happened so frequently in the past few years that young fellows
starting in my profession have come to me for a word of advice, that
I have found it convenient now to condense my system into a brief
formula. 'Resource and Tact'--that is my motto. Tact, of course, has
always been with me a _sine qua non_; while as for resource, I think I
may say that I have usually contrived to show a certain modicum of what
I might call _finesse_ in handling those little _contretemps_ which
inevitably arise from time to time in the daily life of a gentleman's
personal gentleman. I am reminded, by way of an instance, of the
Episode of the School for Young Ladies near Brighton--an affair which,
I think, may be said to have commenced one evening at the moment when I
brought Mr Wooster his whisky and siphon and he addressed me with such
remarkable petulance.

Not a little moody Mr Wooster had been for some days--far from his
usual bright self. This I had attributed to the natural reaction from
a slight attack of influenza from which he had been suffering; and, of
course, took no notice, merely performing my duties as usual, until on
the evening of which I speak he exhibited this remarkable petulance
when I brought him his whisky and siphon.

'Oh, dash it, Jeeves!' he said, manifestly overwrought. 'I wish at
least you'd put it on another table for a change.'

'Sir?' I said.

'Every night, dash it all,' proceeded Mr Wooster morosely, 'you come in
at exactly the same old time with the same old tray and put it on the
same old table. I'm fed up, I tell you. It's the bally monotony of it
that makes it all seem so frightfully bally.'

I confess that his words filled me with a certain apprehension. I had
heard gentlemen in whose employment I have been speak in very much the
same way before, and it had almost invariably meant that they were
contemplating matrimony. It disturbed me, therefore, I am free to
admit, when Mr Wooster addressed me in this fashion. I had no desire
to sever a connexion so pleasant in every respect as his and mine had
been, and my experience is that when the wife comes in at the front
door the valet of bachelor days goes out at the back.

'It's not your fault, of course,' went on Mr Wooster, regaining a
certain degree of composure. 'I'm not blaming you. But, by Jove, I
mean, you must acknowledge--I mean to say, I've been thinking pretty
deeply these last few days, Jeeves, and I've come to the conclusion
mine is an empty life. I'm lonely, Jeeves.'

'You have a great many friends, sir.'

'What's the good of friends?'

'Emerson,' I reminded him, 'says a friend may well be reckoned the
masterpiece of Nature, sir.'

'Well, you can tell Emerson from me next time you see him that he's an
ass.'

'Very good, sir.'

'What I want--Jeeves, have you seen that play called
I-forget-its-dashed-name?'

'No, sir.'

'It's on at the What-d'you-call-it. I went last night. The hero's
a chap who's buzzing along, you know, quite merry and bright, and
suddenly a kid turns up and says she's his daughter. Left over from act
one, you know--absolutely the first he'd heard of it. Well, of course,
there's a bit of a fuss and they say to him "What-ho?" and he says,
"Well, what about it?" and they say, "Well, _what_ about it?" and he
says, "Oh all right, then, if that's the way you feel!" and he takes
the kid and goes off with her out into the world together, you know.
Well, what I'm driving at, Jeeves, is that I envied that chappie. Most
awfully jolly little girl, you know, clinging to him trustingly and
what-not. Something to look after, if you know what I mean. Jeeves, I
wish I had a daughter. I wonder what the procedure is?'

'Marriage is, I believe, considered the preliminary step, sir.'

'No, I mean about adopting a kid. You can adopt kids, you know, Jeeves.
But what I want to know is how you start about it.'

'The process, I should imagine, would be highly complicated and
laborious, sir. It would cut into your spare time.'

'Well, I'll tell you what I could do, then. My sister will be back from
India next week with her three little girls. I'll give up this flat
and take a house and have them all to live with me. By Jove, Jeeves,
I think that's rather a scheme, what? Prattle of childish voices, eh?
Little feet pattering hither and thither, yes?'

I concealed my perturbation, but the effort to preserve my _sang-froid_
tested my powers to the utmost. The course of action outlined by Mr
Wooster meant the finish of our cosy bachelor establishment if it came
into being as a practical proposition; and no doubt some men in my
place would at this juncture have voiced their disapproval. I avoided
this blunder.

'If you will pardon my saying so, sir,' I suggested, 'I think you
are not quite yourself after your influenza. If I might express the
opinion, what you require is a few days by the sea. Brighton is very
handy, sir.'

'Are you suggesting that I'm talking through my hat?'

'By no means, sir. I merely advocate a short stay at Brighton as a
physical recuperative.'

Mr Wooster considered.

'Well, I'm not sure you're not right,' he said at length. 'I _am_
feeling more or less of an onion. You might shove a few things in a
suit-case and drive me down in the car tomorrow.'

'Very good, sir.'

'And when we get back I'll be in the pink and ready to tackle this
pattering-feet wheeze.'

'Exactly, sir.'

Well, it was a respite, and I welcomed it. But I began to see that a
crisis had arisen which would require adroit handling. Rarely had I
observed Mr Wooster more set on a thing. Indeed, I could recall no
such exhibition of determination on his part since the time when he
had insisted, against my frank disapproval, on wearing purple socks.
However, I had coped successfully with that outbreak, and I was by
no means unsanguine that I should eventually be able to bring the
present affair to a happy issue. Employers are like horses. They
require managing. Some gentlemen's personal gentlemen have the knack of
managing them, some have not. I, I am happy to say, have no cause for
complaint.

       *       *       *       *       *

For myself, I found our stay at Brighton highly enjoyable, and should
have been willing to extend it, but Mr Wooster, still restless, wearied
of the place by the end of two days, and on the third afternoon he
instructed me to pack up and bring the car round to the hotel. We
started back along the London road at about five on a fine summer's
day, and had travelled perhaps two miles when I perceived in the road
before us a young lady, gesticulating with no little animation. I
applied the brake and brought the vehicle to a standstill.

'What,' inquired Mr Wooster, waking from a reverie, 'is the big thought
at the back of this, Jeeves?'

'I observed a young lady endeavouring to attract our attention with
signals a little way down the road, sir,' I explained. 'She is now
making her way towards us.'

Mr Wooster peered.

'I see her. I expect she wants a lift, Jeeves.'

'That was the interpretation which I placed upon her actions, sir.'

'A jolly-looking kid,' said Mr Wooster. 'I wonder what she's doing,
biffing about the high road.'

'She has the air to me, sir, of one who has been absenting herself
without leave from her school, sir.'

'Hallo-allo-allo!' said Mr Wooster, as the child reached us. 'Do you
want a lift?'

'Oh, I say, can you?' said the child, with marked pleasure.

'Where do you want to go?'

'There's a turning to the left about a mile farther on. If you'll put
me down there, I'll walk the rest of the way. I say, thanks awfully.
I've got a nail in my shoe.'

She climbed in at the back. A red-haired young person with a snub-nose
and an extremely large grin. Her age, I should imagine, would be
about twelve. She let down one of the spare seats, and knelt on it to
facilitate conversation.

'I'm going to get into a frightful row,' she began. 'Miss Tomlinson
will be perfectly furious.'

'No, really?' said Mr Wooster.

'It's a half-holiday, you know, and I sneaked away to Brighton, because
I wanted to go on the pier and put pennies in the slot-machines. I
thought I could get back in time so that nobody would notice I'd gone,
but I got this nail in my shoe, and now there'll be a fearful row. Oh,
well,' she said, with a philosophy which, I confess, I admired, 'it
can't be helped. What's your car? A Sunbeam, isn't it? We've got a
Wolseley at home.'

Mr Wooster was visibly perturbed. As I have indicated, he was at this
time in a highly malleable frame of mind, tender-hearted to a degree
where the young of the female sex was concerned. Her sad case touched
him deeply.

'Oh, I say, this is rather rotten,' he observed. 'Isn't there anything
to be done? I say, Jeeves, don't you think something could be done?'

'It was not my place to make the suggestion, sir,' I replied, 'but,
as you yourself have brought the matter up, I fancy the trouble is
susceptible of adjustment. I think it would be a legitimate subterfuge
were you to inform the young lady's schoolmistress that you are an old
friend of the young lady's father. In this case you could inform Miss
Tomlinson that you had been passing the school and had seen the young
lady at the gate and taken her for a drive. Miss Tomlinson's chagrin
would no doubt in these circumstances be sensibly diminished if not
altogether dispersed.'

'Well, you _are_ a sportsman!' observed the young person, with
considerable enthusiasm. And she proceeded to kiss me--in connexion
with which I have only to say that I was sorry she had just been
devouring some sticky species of sweetmeat.

'Jeeves, you've hit it!' said Mr Wooster. 'A sound, even fruity,
scheme. I say, I suppose I'd better know your name and all that, if I'm
a friend of your father's.'

'My name's Peggy Mainwaring, thanks awfully,' said the young person.
'And my father's Professor Mainwaring. He's written a lot of books.
You'll be expected to know that.'

'Author of the well-known series of philosophical treatises, sir,' I
ventured to interject. 'They have a great vogue, though, if the young
lady will pardon my saying so, many of the Professor's opinions strike
me personally as somewhat empirical. Shall I drive on to the school,
sir?'

'Yes, carry on. I say, Jeeves, it's a rummy thing. Do you know, I've
never been inside a girls' school in my life.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'Ought to be a dashed interesting experience, Jeeves, what?'

'I fancy that you may find it so, sir,' I said.

We drove on a matter of half a mile down a lane, and, directed by
the young person, I turned in at the gates of a house of imposing
dimensions, bringing the car to a halt at the front door. Mr Wooster
and the child entered, and presently a parlourmaid came out.

'You're to take the car round to the stables, please,' she said.

'Ah!' I said. 'Then everything is satisfactory, eh? Where has Mr
Wooster gone?'

'Miss Peggy has taken him off to meet her friends. And cook says she
hopes you'll step round to the kitchen later and have a cup of tea.'

'Inform her that I shall be delighted. Before I take the car to
the stables, would it be possible for me to have a word with Miss
Tomlinson?'

A moment later I was following her into the drawing-room.

Handsome but strong-minded--that was how I summed up Miss Tomlinson at
first glance. In some ways she recalled to my mind Mr Wooster's Aunt
Agatha. She had the same penetrating gaze and that indefinable air of
being reluctant to stand any nonsense.

'I fear I am possibly taking a liberty, madam,' I began, 'but I
am hoping that you will allow me to say a word with respect to my
employer. I fancy I am correct in supposing that Mr Wooster did not
tell you a great deal about himself?'

'He told me nothing about himself, except that he was a friend of
Professor Mainwaring.'

'He did not inform you, then, that he was _the_ Mr Wooster?'

'_The_ Mr Wooster?'

'Bertram Wooster, madam.'

I will say for Mr Wooster that, mentally negligible though he no doubt
is, he has a name that suggests almost infinite possibilities. He
sounds, if I may elucidate my meaning, like Someone--especially if you
have just been informed that he is an intimate friend of so eminent a
man as Professor Mainwaring. You might not, no doubt, be able to say
offhand whether he was Bertram Wooster the novelist, or Bertram Wooster
the founder of a new school of thought; but you would have an uneasy
feeling that you were exposing your ignorance if you did not give the
impression of familiarity with the name. Miss Tomlinson, as I had
rather foreseen, nodded brightly.

'Oh, _Bertram_ Wooster!' she said.

'He is an extremely retiring gentleman, madam, and would be the last to
suggest it himself, but, knowing him as I do, I am sure that he would
take it as a graceful compliment if you were to ask him to address the
young ladies. He is an excellent extempore speaker.'

'A very good idea,' said Miss Tomlinson decidedly. 'I am very much
obliged to you for suggesting it. I will certainly ask him to talk to
the girls.'

'And should he make a pretence--through modesty--of not wishing--'

'I shall insist.'

'Thank you, madam. I am obliged. You will not mention my share in the
matter? Mr Wooster might think that I had exceeded my duties.'

I drove round to the stables and halted the car in the yard. As I got
out, I looked at it somewhat intently. It was a good car, and appeared
to be in excellent condition, but somehow I seemed to feel that
something was going to go wrong with it--something serious--something
that would not be able to be put right again for at least a couple of
hours.

One gets these presentiments.

       *       *       *       *       *

It may have been some half-hour later that Mr Wooster came into
the stable-yard as I was leaning against the car enjoying a quiet
cigarette.

'No, don't chuck it away, Jeeves,' he said, as I withdrew the cigarette
from my mouth. 'As a matter of fact, I've come to touch you for a
smoke. Got one to spare?'

'Only gaspers, I fear, sir.'

'They'll do,' responded Mr Wooster, with no little eagerness.
I observed that his manner was a trifle fatigued and his eye
somewhat wild. 'It's a rummy thing, Jeeves, I seem to have lost my
cigarette-case. Can't find it anywhere.'

'I am sorry to hear that, sir. It is not in the car.'

'No? Must have dropped it somewhere, then.' He drew at his gasper with
relish. 'Jolly creatures, small girls, Jeeves,' he remarked, after a
pause.

'Extremely so, sir.'

'Of course, I can imagine some fellows finding them a bit exhausting
in--er--'

'_En masse_, sir?'

'That's the word. A bit exhausting _en masse_.'

'I must confess, sir, that that is how they used to strike me. In
my younger day, at the outset of my career, sir, I was at one time
page-boy in a school for young ladies.'

'No, really? I never knew that before. I say, Jeeves--er--did
the--er--dear little souls _giggle_ much in your day?'

'Practically without cessation, sir.'

'Makes a fellow feel a bit of an ass, what? I shouldn't wonder if they
usedn't to stare at you from time to time, too, eh?'

'At the school where I was employed, sir, the young ladies had a
regular game which they were accustomed to play when a male visitor
arrived. They would stare fixedly at him and giggle, and there was a
small prize for the one who made him blush first.'

'Oh, no, I say, Jeeves, not really?'

'Yes, sir. They derived great enjoyment from the pastime.'

'I'd no idea small girls were such demons.'

'More deadly than the male, sir.'

Mr Wooster passed a handkerchief over his brow.

'Well, we're going to have tea in a few minutes, Jeeves. I expect I
shall feel better after tea.'

'We will hope so, sir.'

But I was by no means sanguine.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had an agreeable tea in the kitchen. The buttered toast was good and
the maids nice girls, though with little conversation. The parlourmaid,
who joined us towards the end of the meal, after performing her duties
in the school dining-room, reported that Mr Wooster was sticking it
pluckily, but seemed feverish. I went back to the stable-yard, and I
was just giving the car another look over when the young Mainwaring
child appeared.

'Oh, I say,' she said, 'will you give this to Mr Wooster when you see
him?' She held out Mr Wooster's cigarette-case. 'He must have dropped
it somewhere. I say,' she proceeded, 'it's an awful lark. He's going to
give a lecture to the school.'

'Indeed, miss?'

'We love it when there are lectures. We sit and stare at the poor
dears, and try to make them dry up. There was a man last term who got
hiccoughs. Do you think Mr Wooster will get hiccoughs?'

'We can but hope for the best, miss.'

'It would be such a lark, wouldn't it?'

'Highly enjoyable, miss.'

'Well, I must be getting back. I want to get a front seat.'

And she scampered off. An engaging child. Full of spirits.

She had hardly gone when there was an agitated noise, and round the
corner came Mr Wooster. Perturbed. Deeply so.

'Jeeves!'

'Sir?'

'Start the car!'

'Sir?'

'I'm off!'

'Sir?'

Mr Wooster danced a few steps.

'Don't stand there saying "sir?" I tell you I'm off. Bally off! There's
not a moment to waste. The situation's desperate. Dash it, Jeeves, do
you know what's happened? The Tomlinson female has just sprung it on
me that I'm expected to make a speech to the girls! Got to stand up
there in front of the whole dashed collection and talk! I can just see
myself! Get that car going, Jeeves, dash it all. A little speed, a
little speed!'

'Impossible, I fear, sir. The car is out of order.'

Mr Wooster gaped at me. Very glassily he gaped.

'Out of order!'

'Yes, sir. Something is wrong. Trivial, perhaps, but possibly a matter
of some little time to repair.' Mr Wooster, being one of those easy
going young gentlemen who will drive a car but never take the trouble
to study its mechanism, I felt justified in becoming technical. 'I
think it is the differential gear, sir. Either that or the exhaust.'

I am fond of Mr Wooster, and I admit I came very near to melting as I
looked at his face. He was staring at me in a sort of dumb despair that
would have touched anybody.

'Then I'm sunk! Or'--a slight gleam of hope flickered across his drawn
features--'do you think I could sneak out and leg it across country,
Jeeves?'

'Too late, I fear, sir.' I indicated with a slight gesture the
approaching figure of Miss Tomlinson, who was advancing with a serene
determination in his immediate rear.

'Ah, there you are, Mr Wooster.'

He smiled a sickly smile.

'Yes--er--here I am!'

'We are all waiting for you in the large schoolroom.'

'But I say, look here,' said Mr Wooster, 'I--I don't know a bit what to
talk about.'

'Why, anything, Mr Wooster. Anything that comes into your head. Be
bright,' said Miss Tomlinson. 'Bright and amusing.'

'Oh, bright and amusing?'

'Possibly tell them a few entertaining stories. But, at the same
time, do not neglect the graver note. Remember that my girls are on
the threshold of life, and will be eager to hear something brave and
helpful and stimulating--something which they can remember in after
years. But, of course, you know the sort of thing, Mr Wooster. Come.
The young people are waiting.'

       *       *       *       *       *

I have spoken earlier of resource and the part it plays in the life
of a gentleman's personal gentleman. It is a quality peculiarly
necessary if one is to share in scenes not primarily designed for one's
cooperation. So much that is interesting in life goes on apart behind
closed doors that your gentleman's gentleman, if he is not to remain
hopelessly behind the march of events, should exercise his wits in
order to enable himself to be--if not a spectator--at least an auditor
when there is anything of interest toward. I deprecate as vulgar and
undignified the practice of listening at keyholes, but without lowering
myself to that, I have generally contrived to find a way.

In the present case it was simple. The large schoolroom was situated on
the ground floor, with commodious French windows, which, as the weather
was clement, remained open throughout the proceedings. By stationing
myself behind a pillar on the porch or veranda which adjoined the room,
I was enabled to see and hear all. It was an experience which I should
be sorry to have missed. Mr Wooster, I may say at once, indubitably
excelled himself.

Mr Wooster is a young gentleman with practically every desirable
quality except one. I do not mean brains, for in an employer brains are
not desirable. The quality to which I allude is hard to define, but
perhaps I might call it the gift of dealing with the Unusual Situation.
In the presence of the Unusual, Mr Wooster is too prone to smile weakly
and allow his eyes to protrude. He lacks Presence. I have often wished
that I had the power to bestow upon him some of the _savoir-faire_ of
a former employer of mine, Mr Montague-Todd, the well-known financier,
now in the second year of his sentence. I have known men call upon Mr
Todd with the express intention of horsewhipping him and go away half
an hour later laughing heartily and smoking one of his cigars. To Mr
Todd it would have been child's play to speak a few impromptu words to
a schoolroom full of young ladies; in fact, before he had finished,
he would probably have induced them to invest all their pocket-money
in one of his numerous companies; but to Mr Wooster it was plainly an
ordeal of the worst description. He gave one look at the young ladies,
who were all staring at him in an extremely unwinking manner, then
blinked and started to pick feebly at his coat-sleeve. His aspect
reminded me of that of a bashful young man who, persuaded against his
better judgement to go on the platform and assist a conjurer in his
entertainment, suddenly discovers that rabbits and hard-boiled eggs are
being taken out of the top of his head.

The proceedings opened with a short but graceful speech of introduction
from Miss Tomlinson.

'Girls,' said Miss Tomlinson, 'some of you have already met Mr
Wooster--Mr _Bertram_ Wooster, and you all, I hope, know him by
reputation.' Here, I regret to say, Mr Wooster gave a hideous, gurgling
laugh and, catching Miss Tomlinson's eye, turned a bright scarlet.
Miss Tomlinson resumed: 'He has very kindly consented to say a few
words to you before he leaves, and I am sure that you will all give him
your very earnest attention. Now, please.'

She gave a spacious gesture with her right hand as she said the last
two words, and Mr Wooster, apparently under the impression that they
were addressed to him, cleared his throat and began to speak. But it
appeared that her remark was directed to the young ladies, and was
in the nature of a cue or signal, for she had no sooner spoken to
them than the whole school rose to its feet in a body and burst into
a species of chant, of which I am glad to say I remember the words,
though the tune eludes me. The words ran as follows:

    Many greetings to you!
    Many greetings to you!
    Many greetings, dear stranger,
    Many greetings,
    Many greetings,
    Many greetings to you!
    Many greetings to you!
    To you!

Considerable latitude of choice was given to the singers in the matter
of key, and there was little of what I might call co-operative effort.
Each child went on till she had reached the end, then stopped and
waited for the stragglers to come up. It was an unusual performance,
and I, personally, found it extremely exhilarating. It seemed to smite
Mr Wooster, however, like a blow. He recoiled a couple of steps and
flung up an arm defensively. Then the uproar died away, and an air
of expectancy fell upon the room. Miss Tomlinson directed a brightly
authoritative gaze upon Mr Wooster, and he blinked, gulped once or
twice, and tottered forward.

'Well, you know--' he said.

Then it seemed to strike him that this opening lacked the proper formal
dignity.

'Ladies--'

A silvery peal of laughter from the front row stopped him again.

'Girls!' said Miss Tomlinson. She spoke in a low, soft voice, but the
effect was immediate. Perfect stillness instantly descended upon all
present. I am bound to say that, brief as my acquaintance with Miss
Tomlinson had been, I could recall few women I had admired more. She
had grip.

I fancy that Miss Tomlinson had gauged Mr Wooster's oratorical
capabilities pretty correctly by this time, and had come to the
conclusion that little in the way of a stirring address was to be
expected from him.

'Perhaps,' she said, 'as it is getting late, and he has not very much
time to spare, Mr Wooster will just give you some little word of advice
which may be helpful to you in after-life, and then we will sing the
school song and disperse to our evening lessons.'

She looked at Mr Wooster. He passed a finger round the inside of his
collar.

'Advice? After-life? What? Well, I don't know--'

'Just some brief word of counsel, Mr Wooster,' said Miss Tomlinson
firmly.

'Oh, well--Well, yes--Well--' It was painful to see Mr Wooster's brain
endeavouring to work. 'Well, I'll tell you something that's often done
_me_ a bit of good, and it's a thing not many people know. My old Uncle
Henry gave me the tip when I first came to London. "Never forget, my
boy," he said, "that, if you stand outside Romano's in the Strand, you
can see the clock on the wall of the Law Courts down in Fleet Street.
Most people who don't know don't believe it's possible, because there
are a couple of churches in the middle of the road, and you would think
they would be in the way. But you can, and it's worth knowing. You
can win a lot of money betting on it with fellows who haven't found
it out." And, by Jove, he was perfectly right, and it's a thing to
remember. Many a quid have I--'

Miss Tomlinson gave a hard, dry cough, and he stopped in the middle of
a sentence.

'Perhaps it will be better, Mr Wooster,' she said, in a cold, even
voice, 'if you were to tell my girls some little story. What you say
is, no doubt, extremely interesting, but perhaps a little--'

'Oh, ah, yes,' said Mr Wooster. 'Story? Story?' He appeared completely
distraught, poor young gentleman. 'I wonder if you've heard the one
about the stockbroker and the chorus-girl?'

'We will now sing the school song,' said Miss Tomlinson, rising like an
iceberg.

I decided not to remain for the singing of the school song. It seemed
probable to me that Mr Wooster would shortly be requiring the car, so I
made my way back to the stable-yard, to be in readiness.

I had not long to wait. In a very few moments he appeared, tottering.
Mr Wooster's is not one of those inscrutable faces which it is
impossible to read. On the contrary, it is a limpid pool in which is
mirrored each passing emotion. I could read it now like a book, and his
first words were very much on the lines I had anticipated.

'Jeeves,' he said hoarsely, 'is that damned car mended yet?'

'Just this moment, sir. I have been working on it assiduously.'

'Then, for heaven's sake, let's go!'

'But I understood that you were to address the young ladies, sir.'

'Oh, I've done that!' responded Mr Wooster, blinking twice with
extraordinary rapidity. 'Yes, I've done that.'

'It was a success, I hope, sir?'

'Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Most extraordinarily successful. Went like a breeze.
But--er--I think I may as well be going. No use outstaying one's
welcome, what?'

'Assuredly not, sir.'

I had climbed into my seat and was about to start the engine, when
voices made themselves heard; and at the first sound of them Mr Wooster
sprang with almost incredible nimbleness into the tonneau, and when I
glanced round he was on the floor covering himself with a rug. The last
I saw of him was a pleading eye.

'Have you seen Mr Wooster, my man?'

Miss Tomlinson had entered the stable-yard, accompanied by a lady of, I
should say, judging from her accent, French origin.

'No, madam.'

The French lady uttered some exclamation in her native tongue.

'Is anything wrong, madam?' I inquired.

Miss Tomlinson in normal mood was, I should be disposed to imagine,
a lady who would not readily confide her troubles to the ear of a
gentleman's gentleman, however sympathetic his aspect. That she did so
now was sufficient indication of the depth to which she was stirred.

'Yes, there is! Mademoiselle has just found several of the girls
smoking cigarettes in the shrubbery. When questioned, they stated that
Mr Wooster had given them the horrid things.' She turned. 'He must be
in the garden somewhere, or in the house. I think the man is out of his
senses. Come, mademoiselle!'

It must have been about a minute later that Mr Wooster poked his head
out of the rug like a tortoise.

'Jeeves!'

'Sir?'

'Get a move on! Start her up! Get going and _keep_ going!'

I applied my foot to the self-starter.

'It would perhaps be safest to drive carefully until we are out of
the school grounds, sir,' I said. 'I might run over one of the young
ladies, sir.'

'Well, what's the objection to that?' demanded Mr Wooster with
extraordinary bitterness.

'Or even Miss Tomlinson sir.'

'Don't!' said Mr Wooster wistfully. 'You make my mouth water!'

       *       *       *       *       *

'Jeeves,' said Mr Wooster, when I brought him his whisky and siphon one
night about a week later, 'this is dashed jolly.'

'Sir?'

'Jolly. Cosy and pleasant, you know. I mean, looking at the clock and
wondering if you're going to be late with the good old drinks, and then
you coming in with the tray always on time, never a minute late, and
shoving it down on the table and biffing off, and the next night coming
in and shoving it down and biffing off, and the next night--I mean,
gives you a sort of safe, restful feeling. Soothing! That's the word.
Soothing!'

'Yes, sir. Oh, by the way, sir--'

'Well?'

'Have you succeeded in finding a suitable house yet, sir?'

'House? What do you mean, house?'

'I understood, sir, that it was your intention to give up the flat and
take a house of sufficient size to enable you to have your sister, Mrs
Scholfield, and her three young ladies to live with you.'

Mr Wooster shuddered strongly.

'That's off, Jeeves,' he said.

'Very good, sir,' I replied.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARRY ON, JEEVES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


