The Project Gutenberg eBook of Notes on the Royal Academy Exhibition, 1868
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Notes on the Royal Academy Exhibition, 1868

Author: William Michael Rossetti
        Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release date: February 1, 2025 [eBook #75265]

Language: English

Original publication: London: John Camden Hotten, 1868

Credits: Mairi and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES ON THE ROYAL ACADEMY EXHIBITION, 1868 ***





Notes on the Royal Academy Exhibition, 1868




_PRICE, ONE SHILLING._


  NOTES ON THE
  ROYAL ACADEMY
  EXHIBITION, 1868.

  Part I., by
    Wm. Michael Rossetti.

  Part II., by
    Algernon C. Swinburne.

  LONDON:
  JOHN CAMDEN HOTTEN PICCADILLY.

(ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.)




BY HER MAJESTY’S ROYAL LETTERS PATENT.

BRYANT & MAY’S

The “Times” says “Lucifers have risen gradually to be at last a special
source of danger, and no careful housekeeper who looked at these
returns (_Fire Brigade_) would ever allow any but _Safety Matches_
inside their doors.”


PATENT

SAFETY MATCHES

_FRAUD._ Without the precaution of observing closely the address,
BRYANT & MAY, and their Trade Mark, [Illustration: TRADE MARK] the
Public may be imposed upon with an article that _does not afford_
Protection from Fire.

LIGHT ONLY ON THE BOX.




NOTES ON THE ROYAL ACADEMY EXHIBITION, 1868.

  PART I. BY
  WM. MICHAEL ROSSETTI.

  PART II. BY
  ALGERNON C. SWINBURNE.

  “Desiring this man’s art, and that man’s scope.”--SHAKSPEARE.

  LONDON:
  JOHN CAMDEN HOTTEN, PICCADILLY.

  (ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.)




The reader of this pamphlet will be apt to understand, from its very
arrangement, the fact that each of the writers speaks solely for
himself. Each chooses his own point of view, and expresses his own
opinion, and in his own way. If the opinions happen to diverge, it will
be for the reader to select, as he pleases, either or neither.

                                                        A. C. S.
                                                        W. M. R.




A person who undertakes to express to the public his opinion of any
such Exhibition as that of the Royal Academy is not unreasonably liable
to the imputation of presumption. For that imputation I am prepared; I
admit it to be, within certain limits, just; and must bear it as I may.

But there are two forms of possible and probable censure which I should
respectfully decline to accept as well bestowed.

The first is censure of a signed critical pamphlet, _rather than_
an unsigned newspaper or review article. The pamphlet expresses the
opinion of an individual: the article does or ought to do the same. So
far they stand on the same ground; anything which may be presumption
in the first is presumption in the second also. The difference is that
the first does, while the second does not, lay bare the writer to the
retorts of any person who may hold himself aggrieved: that may be more
open, more equitable, and more bold, but it is not more presumptuous.

The second form of misleading censure is that which makes a point of
reprobating omissions. The limits of this pamphlet, as to dimensions
and as to the time and facilities available for its preparation and
composition, are manifestly narrow. All that the writer professes is to
say straightforwardly whatever he does say: he by no means implies that
nothing else remains to be noted concerning the works of art commented
upon, nor that the works wholly omitted are undeserving of mention.
If anybody, therefore, tells me that the picture of A, of which
this pamphlet says nothing, merits criticism, or that the picture of
B, praised for colour, claims praise on the score of drawing also,
I shall have no difficulty in admitting the probable correctness of
these remarks; but, if he adds that I am blameable for the omissions, I
shall feel entitled to reply that A’s picture and B’s draughtsmanship
were not in the bond. What _is_ in the bond is liberty of selection
and candour of statement on my part: if my selection is stupid, or my
statement unfair or erroneous, be that the charge. Let the censure
concern itself with something wrong that _is_ done; not with something
right that might have been done.

                                                        W. M. R.




ROYAL ACADEMY EXHIBITION, 1868.

_PART I._


Some twenty years and more ago, the ingrained fault of the British
School of Painting was that it painted flimsy pictures. They were not
exactly sketchy, having little of either the merits or defects proper
to the phase of art termed sketching: pictures they were, but flimsy
pictures. Then came the thick-and-thin revolution of Præraphaelitism;
which aimed at treating substantial subjects, thinking them out deeply,
and painting them with abnormal thoroughness. That revolution scarcely
exists now otherwise than in its results: certain works executed
according to the principle in question, and representing it; many
others parodying or maiming the principle, and traducing it; a vast
number of works, still in course of active production, which owe their
genesis to the principle, but have metamorphosed it beyond recognition.
So that now we have come round to a condition of the school more
analogous to that of twenty years ago: only that the present staple
product is, instead of flimsy pictures, works executed with a valuable
reserve-fund of knowledge, efficiency, and material, but in the feeling
and with the aim proper to sketches. Critics have long been beseeching
for “breadth.” That is now supplied to them in handsome measure; but
it is found that breadth, like frittering, may overlie a considerable
surface of commonplace and inanity. The very skill of our current
generation of painters is one of their chief perils; for it enables
them to indicate with ease, and often indeed with mastery, what less
dexterity could only strive for with labour. Rapid gains and the tumult
of competition conduce towards the same result. The upshot, to some
critics, is, in the present Academy exhibition, a sense of no little
dissatisfaction, mingled with unstinted recognition of telling and
well-diffused ability. One perceives that many artists can now do a
good deal, if they choose; but the more sound one sees the attainments
of the painter himself to be, the less one is disposed to accept with
implicit faith the rather cheap outcome of those attainments. Sketches
may be excellent things, and they testify to the ready availability of
the artist’s gifts: but sketches magnified into pictures cloy upon one.
They betray in especial a self-complacent unconcern for higher efforts.
In general character the present Academy exhibition, the hundredth of
the series, is very like that of 1867: that was a particularly clever
display, according to its own standard, and this perhaps is nearly on a
par with it.[A]

  [A] To estimate the comparative merits of successive Exhibitions
      is always to me a difficult matter. The sentence in the text
      expresses what I felt about the present Academy show while I
      was in the rooms and as I began writing; but, on treating of
      the pictures individually, I so often have to say that some
      painter is this year quite at his best that I infer the
      display of 1868 may probably be fully as good as that of
      1867. I leave the text, however, unaltered, as faithful to a
      general impression.

With these few remarks, I turn at once to the walls, and begin with--

6. MILLAIS--_Sisters._--It is a great satisfaction to find Mr. Millais
in force this year--in very superior force, for instance, to what
he displayed last year. This group of three girlish sisters--the
painter’s daughters--shows him in pure, unforced, untrammelled
possession of his mastery throughout. The arrangement of the group is
so far artificial that one clearly perceives the sisters are posing
for their portraits: no effort is made to disguise this fact, and it
cannot, I think, be counted as a blemish--rather as one legitimate
method of portrait-painting, though not so popular now as the contrary
scheme. All the three girls are dressed in white muslin, with azure
ribbons, and hair combed out. The background is composed of azaleas,
which, in the left-hand[B] corner of the picture, seem to change from
crimson-pink to vermilion-pink; but the latter colour is scrubbed about
with no appreciable traces of form.

  [B] “Left-hand” and “right-hand,” in this pamphlet, will always be
      used to designate the portions of the pictures opposite to the
      _spectator’s_ left and right respectively.

10. LEYS--_La Famille Pallavicini de Gênes réclamant le droit de
Bourgeoisie des Bourgmestres et Echevins de la Ville d’Anvers,
1542._--When our Royal Academy is honoured by a contribution from one
of the first magnates of European art, it becomes us to accept his
work in a spirit of gratitude, with much desire to study, and very
little to cavil. It is by way of study that I venture to note some
of the leading characteristics of that mediæval style which has made
Baron Leys famous throughout the civilized world. 1st. He identifies
himself with the period he paints--not only in a general way, as a
good scholar might do, but especially in respect of its concerted
outer demonstrations, and its social aspects, and this with all the
more zest when a spice of patriotism is involved. 2nd. Working from
this solid basis of mediævalism, he is never afraid of individualizing
his personages to the very uttermost: they are actual men and women
whom he might--and for anything I know does--pick up in the streets of
modern Belgium. An extreme instance appears in the present picture,
in the furthest right-hand figure, whose portrait-like aspect is
unmistakeable. This, however, being an obviously modern head, differs
from the generality--which, with their personal actuality, are somehow
_projected back_, by the imagination and skill of the painter, into
the mediæval period, and thus come to be even more like what one
conceives of the sixteenth than what one knows of the nineteenth
century. Hence an air of startling realism: the personages are as real
as if they were painted in coats and trowsers; and the mediævalism
is as real as any modern man can make it. The very uncouthness and
hard-featuredness of the figures is a powerful element in this realism:
it looks as if the painter had seen them actually there, and depicted
them as in duty bound--had he been selecting, one would expect more
of positive beauty or semi-idealism. 3rd. Baron Leys paints with a
remarkable mixture of force and slightness, detail and unfinish. He
gives an extraordinary number of items, and with singular strength of
definition, yet with little that can, on close inspection, be called
elaboration. Everything is done so as to solicit the eye at a little
distance, and up to a certain point to satisfy, never to satiate it.
The style of execution has even a good deal that might be termed rough
and ready; and (what is of great importance) it is quite unlike any
handiwork of the Middle Ages themselves. Moreover, the painter (in the
present phase of his style) very seldom gives any mere _accidents_ of
light and shade--direct or flickering sunshine, contrasts of natural
and artificial light, or the like. It may seem fanciful to say that
this also subserves the historical impression; and yet I think it
does so powerfully--the scenes and the actors in them tell upon the
mind, through the eye, as having passed out of the momentary into the
permanent--out of the region of chance and change into that dim lumour
and remote subsistency of the past. Having said thus much, by way of
study, of Baron Leys’s pictures in general, I shall not endeavour to
analyse the particular work before us. It is a _replica_ of one of his
frescoes in the Townhall of Antwerp, and illustrates the value which
distinguished foreigners were wont to set upon the right of citizenship
in that great commercial and privileged city. It is to be regarded as
an important and excellent specimen of the master, though some others
might deserve the preference in point of executive completeness.

17. LINNELL, SEN.--_English Woodlands._--A very characteristic and
fine example of the painter’s style: one might use it as a text-book
wherefrom to develope his specialties in the English school of
landscape.

30. WATTS--_Landscape, Evening._--A small work, but conspicuous by its
broad, strong colour, very warm and mellow: it has power both of hand
and of sentiment. The sky is especially luminous.

44. HEMY--_Tête de Flandre, near Antwerp._--There is a great deal of
space in this picture: and the tone of green-grey colour is finely felt
and solidly sustained. A sense of the ripple in the estuary is given
by a curious sort of sleight of hand--an actual ridging or rucking in
the surface of the paint.

52. COPE--_The Life’s Story._--This is the subject of Othello relating
his adventures to Brabantio and Desdemona. The lady hangs upon the
words of the Moor with a demonstrative interest that fully justified
his inference that she must be in love with him. The picture cannot, I
think, be counted among Mr. Cope’s successes.

64. GRANT--_The Duke of Cambridge at the Battle of the Alma, leading
the Guards up the Hill in support of the Light Division._--The weak
point of this picture is the isolated figure of the Duke himself, which
has more the character of a likeness by a portrait-painter than of a
leading agent in the event. The Guards in the foreground are happily
treated; with sufficient individuality in the several figures, not made
singly over-prominent. The general execution is not unlike that of Sir
Edwin Landseer; which is as much as to say that it has uncommon ability.

70. MILLAIS--_Rosalind and Celia._--A picture full of sunny light and
masterly celerity of execution. The faces have great sentiment, and
ample charm of beauty: the confiding self-subordinating character of
Celia speaks in the lines of her mouth. Touchstone is older than one
would infer from the drama. It is a pity that Mr. Millais did not set
himself to reflect what Rosalind would probably have done with her hair
and costume in order to sustain the disguise of a young man. The upper
portion of the dress is absurdly feminine, and hardly recedes even
from the nineteenth century. On the stage one pardons the paraded sex
of the actress--it is partly unavoidable, and partly a device of her
profession: but in a picture one fairly expects a greater conformity to
the common sense of the situation. Mr. Millais, however, never _will_
pay any attention to his costume. With all the signal merits of the
execution, the texture is not free from woolliness.

87. FRITH--_Before dinner at Boswell’s Lodgings in Bond Street, 1769:
present, Johnson, Garrick, Goldsmith, Reynolds, Murphy, Bickerstaff,
Davies, and Boswell._--We have heard only too often about Goldsmith’s
“bloom-coloured coat.” This is the scene of its exhibition before
Boswell’s guests. The picture may be termed a self-respecting one:
the humours of the personages and the incident are indicated without
being made to stare one out of countenance. _Per contra_, it must be
said that strength is deficient throughout: common weakish mouths
prevail in this distinguished company. Goldsmith and Reynolds are
indifferent likenesses; and Johnson’s clothes fit almost as accurately
as Goldsmith’s.

123. EDWIN LANDSEER--_Rent-Day in the Wilderness._--“After the defeat
of the Stuart army in 1715, at Sheriff Muir, Colonel Donald Murchison,
to whom the Earl of Seaforth confided his confiscated estates in
Ross-shire, defended them for ten years, and regularly transmitted the
rents to his attainted and exiled chief.” The picture shows the rent
being thus collected under difficulties. A bearded clansman, attended
by his daughter, is in the act of paying; a friar kneels close beside
Colonel Murchison; and a number of other Highlanders have assembled
for the occasion. This large and crowded picture has a peculiar look,
in consequence of the stealthy and crouching action of most of the
figures: they are keeping close amid the brushwood on one side of
Loch Affric, while some of the Government soldiers are patrolling the
opposite bank. The work has thus--besides the generic merits which any
large painting by Sir Edwin Landseer is sure to possess--plenty that is
both peculiar and interesting, not unmingled with a certain impression
of discomfort.

138. HERBERT--_The Valley of Moses in the Desert of Sinai._--This
picture (as Mr. Herbert is stated never to have been in the East) is
somewhat noticeable in point of eclectic, and at the same time diluted,
study. The light and tone are agreeable, and free from that hardness
which besets many Eastern pictures; but, on observing the comparative
faintness of the shadows upon the blazing sands, one sees at once that
the avoidance of hardness has involved some sacrifice of truth.

150. WARD--_Royal Marriage, 1477._--The detestable humbug of a sham
contemporary “MS.” is resorted to for the purpose of informing the
reader of the Academy catalogue that this painting represents the
marriage of the Duke of York, aged four, son of Edward IV., to
Lady Anne Mowbray, aged three. A bishop of almost decrepit old age
officiates, and Gloucester is naturally made a prominent witness. Mr.
Ward’s style of painting, chiaroscuro, and handling, is universally
known; it may be termed the overblown style, with about as much
retirement and repose as a peony the hour before it falls to pieces.
But this should not blind us to his solid merits of thought and
invention, always exercised in a direction which tells with the public,
and for the most part felicitously in other respects as well. The
present picture is an instance. Besides any amount of fine dresses and
demonstrative infancy, it boasts a power of association which must
take hold of every spectator: the infant bridal, the gorgeous dawn
of promise to the little sons of King Edward, and the crash of fate
reserved for them within the cerebral convolutions of the future King
Richard. We may afford, while we are about it, to recollect that this
effective subject pertains by right of priority to Mr. Houghton, who
designed it for a woodcut.

167. FRITH--_Sterne and the French Innkeeper’s Daughter._--The
imperfectly Reverend Mr. Sterne is looking at the damsel as she knits
a stocking, and pondering upon its neat adjustment to the shape of her
leg. On general grounds much the same may be said of this picture as
of No. 87: both are superior examples of the easy certainty with which
Mr. Frith can strike the key he wants, just as loud as he wishes it,
and no louder. Sterne (as Goldsmith and Reynolds before) appears to me
anything but a good likeness: the young woman is more French in feature
than in the _ensemble_ of the face.

172. T. FAED--_Worn Out._--This ranks with Mr. Faed’s best pictures: it
is very skilful, and has more equality of painting than usual--somewhat
less of obtruded knack and flourish. The various small accessories are
well related to the main incident of the hard-working father who has
fallen asleep while watching his invalid boy.

188. POOLE--_Custaunce sent adrift by the Constable of Alla, King of
Northumberland._--This moonlight picture has rather the character of a
manufacture; yet it is manufacture by a poetic eye and pictorial hand.
There is some clever handling in the water of the foreground; and the
entire absence of red from the picture--which relies for colour upon
iridescent tints of grey-blue, green, yellow, and so on--is observable.

209. HOUGHTON--_H. Bassett, Esq., in his Laboratory._--A capital
piece of peculiarity. Great pains and intelligence have gone to the
depicting of the scientific plethora of the laboratory; and the sense
of the shut-in, moderately-lit room, not lightly to be intruded upon,
is vivid. Mr. Bassett is represented smoking a pipe. This may seem
a trivial or purposeless incident. Yet it may have been introduced
to indicate some enforced pause in his work while an experiment is
maturing; and, if so, it is certainly not unsuggestive.

223. ORCHARDSON--_Mrs. Birket Foster._--This seems to me about the best
work Mr. Orchardson has yet exhibited: it is a small full-length--more
a subject than a mere portrait. The artist has a certain streaky or
gauzy touch which amounts to mannerism: here the handling and colour
have almost a _soupçon_ of Gainsborough. The bright face, the quiet
lighting of the dusky-boarded room, and the untumbled white muslin
dress, make up a picture in which elegant and artist-like taste verges
upon quaintness.

235. ELMORE--_Ishmael._--An accomplished study, perhaps (within its
limits) unsurpassed by any work of its author.

236. G. D. LESLIE--_Home News._--An English lady in her remote Asiatic
home is reading a letter from the old country. The half-hovering
smile, and the long-drawn regard of the eye as though she were in
contemplation back across the measureless ocean, are delicately caught;
also the coolness of the matted interior, jealously excluding the sun
itself, but not the sense of how it is blazing outside.

242. MILLAIS--_Stella._--A single figure, three-quarter length, and
perhaps the very best Mr. Millais has done of its class. The name
Stella naturally suggests Swift’s Stella; and Swift’s Stella holding
a letter, with a countenance of subdued long-suffering, suggests her
receipt of the letter from Vanessa inquiring whether she and Swift
were in fact married. If this is the incident really intended, the
sympathizing spectator may be startled at being reminded that Stella
was at that time about forty years of age. But Mr. Millais is not the
man to mind much whether he does or does not represent a particular
incident, or whether or not any such representation is endurably
correct. He has painted delightfully a very loveable woman, and that
will probably suffice him and us. The tint of flesh in the arm appears
hardly so pure as the rest of the colouring.

247. O’NEIL--_Before Waterloo._--This picture will certainly have
critics of two sorts. One set, incurious of artistic subtleties, will
batten upon such a purveying of British military heroism, gushing
young creatures, and harrowing family partings. Another set will turn
with æsthetic distaste from so much of ball-costume and regimentals,
and such a cross between the leaden and the garish in colour. An
intermediate set ought also to find a voice, and to aver that the
scheme of arrangement in the picture is very ingenious, and successful
in turning a serious difficulty--that the story is told with great
emphasis and much well-considered variety of detail--and that, when
one faces the picture with deliberation, one can hardly refuse it the
praise of being interesting. If Mr. O’Neil could but get somebody
else’s colour to exude through his brush, with texture and surface to
correspond!

248. SIR C. LINDSAY--_The Earl Somers._--It is only fair to cite this
picture, by an amateur and a Baronet, as one of the best portraits on
the walls. The steadiness of the figure on his feet, without compromise
and without bravado, is alone a considerable merit. A spectator may
be struck by the great number of sitters who elect to be painted in
shooting costume, or in some other dress and with other accessories of
sport. “Manly exercises” will of course account for most of this; and
knickerbockers and black velvet have their share of influence.

260. LEGROS--_The Refectory._--The eye finds repose and satisfaction in
this broadly and firmly painted picture, free from the last suspicion
of _ad captandum_ appeal. Three monks and a tabby cat have assembled to
make a meal off a mackerel--the board laid with a perfectly clean white
cloth. The monks are all men of dignified and thoughtful presence: two
of them still pause over a book of orisons or meditations before they
begin the refection. It might not be unfair to say that there is a
good deal of space to let in the large-sized canvas: but one need not
exactly quarrel with that. The painter, a man now of reputation equally
confirmed and well deserved both in his own country and in ours, knows
perfectly well what he is about; we may safely accept his point of
view, and find in the result that, if he has not done precisely what we
might have bespoken, there is nevertheless a definite value to be got
out of his method of treatment, not to be slighted because a different
method would have given some other and countervailing value. If
anybody wishes to learn (among graver things) what amount of executive
short-hand suffices for making a cat tabby, Mr. Legros’s picture will
inform him.

268. R. BUTLER--_The Lost Path._--This artist’s name is unfamiliar to
me. His little picture of children astray in a copse has great merit of
naïve expression, rendered as well by action as by countenance.

273. STOREY--_The Shy Pupil._--The painter has here attained to a high
point of force in simplicity of work. The subject is a budding girl
learning to dance in her father’s presence. With nothing that can be
called elaboration, the execution would, for purity of lighting and
directness of hand, bear comparison with many a choice Dutch picture.
If we went to Mr. Legros for a tabby cat, we may consult Mr. Storey
for a small dog peering through a door; a few twirls of the brush
have, by a species of legerdemain, produced a surprising amount of
characteristic form. This work, with much effect of solidity, is
nevertheless amenable to my opening remarks as to sketchiness: but, in
so simple and semi-humorous a subject, that need hardly be objected to.

283. DICKINSON--_George Peabody, Esq._--A very honest good piece of
work, and a most unmistakeable likeness, to be remembered among the
portraits of the year much to Mr. Dickinson’s credit.

288. COPE--_The Disciples at Emmaus._--Mr. Cope’s method of art unites
remarkable defining power with a certain thinness of the primary
material; it reminds one of good woodcarving--strong and accurate
modelling bestowed upon a substance which, after the utmost has been
done for it, retains an aboriginal crudity. In the present picture, the
artist has planned out all forcibly and distinctly--he has left nothing
vague to his own mind or the spectator’s eye. Yet no corresponding
impression of reality is produced; the work wants _imaginative_
reality, and therefore its other elements of reality do not tell as
they were intended to do. To attenuate the form of the risen Christ,
and to make his drapery transparent to the evening light, is not the
way to remove him from the regions of fleshliness.

302. HORSLEY--_Rent-day at Haddon Hall._--Considerably the best
picture Mr. Horsley has exhibited of late, or perhaps at any time.
A very moderate proportion of adult good sense may have sufficed to
discriminate it from his staple commodity.

311. G. RICHMOND--_Mrs. Brereton._--While Mr. Richmond can put into
a face so much feminine candour and amiability as we see in this
likeness, no one need be surprised at his eminent standing among
portrait painters. To look at the face seems to be like making Mrs.
Brereton’s acquaintance--or like wishing to make it.

316. CALDERON--_The Young Lord Hamlet._--Yorick is on all-fours on
the pleasance of the Danish palace, with little Hamlet riding on his
back; Queen Gertrude and some of her ladies looking on; and an infant,
presumably Ophelia, not yet “taking notice.” This is strictly a sketch;
no doubt a very able one, and only to be done by a man of long training
and solid acquirement in art. Not only is the thing full of sparkling
animal spirits as a whole, but each point, when one attends to it, is
pertinent and telling: except indeed the face of the lady who holds
Ophelia, and who exhibits a smile as hard as her teeth. This is not the
only time that Mr. Calderon has made considerable play with teeth, and
not, I think, successfully; nothing is more difficult to manage in a
picture.

323. WATTS--_The wife of Pygmalion, a Translation from the
Greek._--This is one of the few works of poetic elevation in the
gallery: it is beautiful with a noble beauty, which one hardly knows
whether rather to call womanly or impassive. It rests midway between
coldness and warmth, without being lukewarm. It should be added that
the merit is not exclusively Mr. Watts’s, the head being truly “a
translation from the Greek,” _i.e._, adapted from the fine antique bust
pointed out not long ago for admiration among the Arundel Marbles in
Oxford.

328. LEIGHTON--_Ariadne abandoned by Theseus. Ariadne watches for
his return; Artemis releases her by death._--This also is a picture
which claims to be of the poetic order, and sustains the claim; it
may without rashness be pronounced the loftiest work Mr. Leighton has
produced, reckoning together subject-matter, scale, and the result
attained. To ignore the limitations of his style, or the symptoms of
them which this picture also presents, would be futile. One might
sum them up by saying that there is a certain hiatus between his
perception of the poetic in art, and his power of expressing it;
and that, though he bridges this over with a readiness of resource
which is to himself almost as natural as the first perception, yet to
others the artificiality of the bridge is glaringly and even irksomely
apparent. But the picture of Ariadne is sufficiently noble to keep
these considerations in the background, as soon as we have once for
all fairly stated or implied them. The face is wrung with sorrow,
yet is free from what we mean to condemn in a work of art when we
term it “painful.” One might say that this woman has died of the very
weariness of daily renewed grief. But the calm now is as profound as
the yearning heretofore; profound as the blue sea violet-tinted in its
distant intensity, or as the lulling oppression of its clang in the
sultry meridian, barely audible as a faint murmur at the dizzy height
of Ariadne’s rock-seat. There is a sensation of stationariness, as if
Phœbus Apollo might be pausing in heaven to see how his sister Artemis
has accomplished her mercy upon the outworn Ariadne. As I looked at the
picture, a divine reminiscence of Shelley intervened:--

   “Yet now despair itself is mild,
      Even as the winds and waters are.
    I could lie down like a tired child,
      And weep away the life of care
    Which I have borne and yet must bear,
      Till death like sleep might steal on me,--
    And I might feel in the warm air
      My cheek grow cold, and hear the sea
  Breathe o’er my dying brain its last monotony.”

329. MASON--_Evening Hymn._--Again a very poetical and beautiful
picture, one of the enduring glories of the present exhibition. It
reaches higher than anything Mr. Mason had hitherto done; and shows him
qualified to paint figures on a fair scale of size, and with an amount
of positive beauty which, in his previous productions (though well
traceable), was to some extent overlaid by the _picturesque_, as that
is popularly understood. This work glows with the light of a spring
sunset, and with the unbidden fervour of a group of young village-girls
who are carolling the Evening Hymn as they saunter homewards. It
seems almost churlish to object to a leading point of treatment in so
delightful a picture; but I confess to some suspicion that the men
who are shown listening might with advantage have been missed out of
the subject altogether--and more especially the youth who comes close
behind a girl in white, holding a rose in her hand. Mr. Mason is a
painter who never loses sight of facts in his pursuit of the beautiful;
this is the one of his works which goes nearest to merging all other
its material in a general ideal of loveliness and solemnity.

331. PETTIE--_Tussle with a Highland Smuggler._--Here we revert to the
category of sketchy work; and we see in this picture and in another by
its author (No. 484, “_Weary with present cares and memories sad_”),
an unpleasant and unrepaying development of style which might be
described as “the offhand squalid.” No. 331 shows extreme--indeed,
excessive--cleverness: but its unsightly violence of action embodies
a subject of little consequence to any one, and of less still to the
cause of fine art.

347. EDWIN LANDSEER--“_Weel, sir, if the deer got the ball, sure’s
deeth Chevy will no leave him._”--A masterpiece of Landseerian art:
the good hound Chevy is seen couched amid high mountain ice and snows,
by the side of a dead deer, which the ravens have already scented from
afar.

356. MILLAIS--_Pilgrims to St. Paul’s._--A more rational title would
be “Greenwich Pensioners at the Tomb of Nelson.” One of them has lost
his left arm--a very resolute, bluff old seaman, whom “foreigneers” may
have been shy of tackling in his time; the other halts upon two wooden
legs, more senile and commonplace, but also, in his undemonstrative
way, one of those who, like his hero, “never saw fear.” His face is
most triumphantly painted; whether regarded as a mere study of a head,
or as a piece of character, or with reference to its intense lighting
by the flare of the sepulchral lantern. Indeed, the picture is quite
admirable throughout, and in power of painting not to be surpassed
by Mr. Millais, nor approached by any competitor. There is in its
materials something which verges towards a _tour de force_; but all is
so manly, and so free from sentimental overdoing, that no charge arises
against it on this ground.

363. YEAMES--_Lady Jane Grey in the Tower._--An able satisfactory
picture; perhaps the best of its author. Lady Jane is in a
controversial colloquy with the Chaplain Feckenham: her face expresses
very successfully that she is weighing his arguments in her mind, and
considering what may be the true answer to them, but with no prospect
of her coming to the conclusion that answer there is none. Feckenham
also is appropriately conceived and painted, without any exaggeration.
Of costume and accessory there is enough, and not overmuch.

369. HOUGHTON--_In the Garden._--A very handsome boy of eight is
lifting his little sister of five to smell a rose upon its bush. A
kitten which has already made some advances towards cat-hood is romping
around the stem. The feeling of the subject would be improved were
there more of a look of smelling in the girl’s face; and the colour
is hardly on a level with the other merits of the picture. It is,
however, a very choice and complete little work; fine in design and
draughtsmanship, and charming in general impression--quite free,
moreover, from that sort of nursery silliness which has infected
some canvasses of late, and has even been aptly enshrined in a title
reproducing the broken utterance of babes. Mr. Houghton knows that
“ta-ta” or “tootsicums,” whether written with the pen or rendered into
the language of the brush, is a mild effort of art.

401. G. D. LESLIE--_Kate Leslie._--This artist is almost always
attractive, and often most engagingly so: the present work may be
cited in proof. But he is “painty” (as the profession terms it) in the
generality of his work, and especially in his flesh-tints. Here the
face has far too much of a tawny or ligneous hue; which is the more
to be regretted as the work, on the whole, comes nearer than usual to
ranking Mr. Leslie among colourists.

402. POYNTER--_The Catapult._--Great knowledge, great power of
combination, and much disciplined artistic capacity, have gone to the
making of this picture. It has more effect, and is on the whole more
pictorial, than the very striking work which Mr. Poynter exhibited last
year--_Israel in Egypt._ Some people may refuse to take much interest
in a scene in which the work of the artificer or mechanician plays so
large a part; but, bating this objection (which to many will be no
objection at all), it is difficult to award anything but praise to the
picture. The event is the use of a catapult as an engine of war in the
siege of Carthage: we see written on one of the beams “Delenda est
Carthago, S.P.Q.R.” The officer is supervising, archers are shooting;
the monster hand of the catapult is about once more to launch a red-hot
bolt against the doomed city: pots of blazing pitch are being hurled
by the defenders at the assailants. The solidity and good balance of
all parts of the subject, the agreeable tone of colour in flesh and
otherwise, the sound drawing, unfaltering and unpretentious, command
high respect.

410. WYNFIELD--_Oliver Cromwell’s First Appearance in the
Parliament._--To find this picture uninteresting would be difficult.
Hampden is represented introducing his cousin to Cromwell; Pym,
Elliot, Sir Robert Phillips, Strafford, and many other famous men, are
present. The arrangement pleases one from its obvious adaptation to
the more important demands of the subject, irrespectively of artistic
conventions. The method of the painting, however, is so excessively
opaque and heavy that, until Mr. Wynfield shall manage to correct this
blemish, one cannot expect his pictures to get cordially accepted by
the public, or to please critical eyes.

424. T. GRAHAM--_The Dominie._--Mr. Graham has powers of a high order;
but he has seemed of late only too likely to be led away by the offhand
practice, semi-grotesque picturesqueness, and rapid success, of some
of his compatriots from beyond Tweed. _The Dominie_ is about the least
laudable picture he has exhibited--tending much to caricature, and to
coarseness of handling. Of course, along with this, there is a deal of
ability; and the figure of the boy still attests a genuine sense of
beauty. Let us trust that Mr. Graham will have “pulled up” by next year.

434. HOOK--_Are Chimney-sweepers Black?_--A most delightful picture,
fully equal to the best productions of its distinguished author. There
are two others in this gallery (Nos. 48 and 270) also excellent:
but so little remains now-a-days to be said about Mr. Hook’s works,
except that they afford deep, pure, and vivid pleasure, and show their
painter to be one of the most artist-like colourists and executants
of the British school, that I have passed them by, and limited myself
to specifying the present one only. A begrimed (not _over_ begrimed)
chimney-sweeper, with the implements of his craft, presents himself
to the startled eyes of a naked infant, as fresh and bright as a
Cupid, who has just been bathing on the margin of the sea: he is still
paddling in a sand-pool, and takes refuge against his young mother’s
dress, hardly so scared as not to be a little amused. This group of the
mother and child is most charming; and all other parts of the picture
are worthy of it.

439. MACLISE--_The Sleep of Duncan._--The first aspect of this work, as
of so many of Mr. Maclise’s, gives an impression of unreality, huddled,
and oppressed with decorative exuberances. A more deliberate inspection
shows that it possesses, in ample measure, the fine qualities which
rank him so high in our school--qualities of invention and design,
associated with remarkable, though bounded and monotonous, gifts of
execution. The moment is when Lady Macbeth, having drugged the guards,
and “laid their daggers ready” (one of these lies within the circlet of
the crown), relinquishes any thought of herself assassinating the old
king, who “resembles her father as he sleeps.” The tragic air of crime
in Lady Macbeth, her superfluous stealthinesses of action, are grandly
given; though it cannot be said that her face differs much from the
type so constant and familiar in Mr. Maclise’s productions. Duncan and
the two guards are all three fine figures. The lighting of the picture
is not obvious: it would appear to be the union of soft moonshine and
pale diffused grey dawn-light which comes through the loop-hole at the
back; but this does not seem to account for all the light in front, as
on the figures of the guards; while neither can one discern, on the
other hand, that much (if any) influence of artificial light has been
intended by the painter. Real the picture would, of course, never be
made to look; but I think it would look considerably less unreal at one
point if Duncan’s head lay deeper in the silken pillows.

440. WELLS--_Letters and News at the Loch-side._--A landscape with
portraits and incident. I pick it out from among the contributions of
its able painter, for the sake of noting the great amount of space,
light, and air, which he has got into this picture, although there
is no single glimpse of sky: the ground rises all round from the
lake-side. This is no small thing to have managed.

449. LEIGHTON--_Acme and Septimius._--Remarkable for its elegant skill
of concentrated composition. The knee of Acme’s left leg--the foot of
the same leg being set underneath her right thigh as she sits--appears
to me to project too much laterally. This may be a convenient place
for calling attention (with implied apology for not speaking of them
with the detail they properly claim) to Mr. Leighton’s three remaining
pictures: Nos. 227, _Jonathan’s Token to David_; 234, _Mrs. Frederick
P. Cockerell_; 522, _Actæa, the Nymph of the Shore._

453. HODGSON--_Chinese Ladies looking at European Curiosities._--A
quaint and amusing notion, and a pleasant picture. A Chinese gentleman
is exhibiting to his wives and their women a pair of European white
satin slippers, which the small-footed fair (or rather dusky) ones
regard as elephantine eccentricities. An Englishwoman looking at a
Chinese “six-marker,” or at a Japanese masterpiece of woodcut design
or colouring, is not more tickled. Perhaps the best head of all is
that of the elderly woman to the right. The peculiarities of Chinese
physiognomy are not at all overdone--indeed, I doubt whether the eyes
are quite sidelong enough. It would have been admissible to make one
of the wives prettier, and (if I am not mistaken) clearer-complexioned
also.

461. LEGROS--_Sir Thomas More showing some of Holbein’s Pictures to
Henry VIII._--Without tampering with his own style, Mr. Legros comes
more than hitherto, in this picture, within the same general lines as
English art. The work, in essentials, is extremely good; and simplicity
of execution does not interfere with its keeping its place well and
solidly amid those which surround it. Sir Thomas More does not strike
me as much of a likeness. Henry is excellent: he sits (if a bull may
be excused) as he would sit in a contemporary portrait, though not as
he _does_ sit in any of those I remember. Perhaps his eyes are less
small than in the likenesses. Holbein looks the best man of the lot:
well able to have done the fine things Sir Thomas is displaying, and
to do as many more as bluff Harry may commission. Three ladies are
also present. One of them gives her head a turn in which the manner
of a connoisseur is dimly anticipated; and one might fancy her to be
saying to herself, “Really, most excellent; but, were I to sit to him,
should I come good-looking enough?” Capitally as the whole subject is
kept together, I think a single little touch would still improve it in
this respect: one of the ladies might be glancing from the picture to
Holbein, and so helping to identify the work with its worker.

477. WALKER--_In the Glen, Rathfarnham Park._--This is a halt of
gipsies, who are lighting a fire; and perhaps there is something more
of incident implied than I happen to catch. Mr. Walker’s pictures
have a certain mottled look and grainy surface which might be called
mannerism, though not too confidently. At any rate, after making some
abatement for this, and for a too easily contented choice of subject,
one is fairly surprised at a sureness of hand which seems to have at
its finger-ends the power of realization without labour, and at a
sturdiness of work which yet picks up (as it were) at every stroke
refinements of drawing and colour. The evidences of ability are so
profuse that a non-practical critic like myself may well, in modesty
and self-knowledge, feel his mouth shut to objections. I should doubt
whether there are in Europe many artists more accomplished than Mr.
Walker, within his own sphere of work.

494. H. S. MARKS--_Experimental Gunnery in the Middle Ages._--Mr. Marks
has done nothing better than this picture; probably nothing equally
good. The subject involves just the sort of out-of-the-way humour
which is his _specialité_; and he has made this the informing spirit
of a full composition without condescending to any burlesque. There is
much varied and capital by-play of incident and expression; and the
subject is so treated as to allow one, even in these days of Armstrong
guns and Chassepots, to feel a good-humoured respect for the primitive
artillerists.

499. PRINSEP--_A Venetian Lover._--The gist of this subject is made
so evident that we could dispense with the motto--“De deux amans, il
y en a toujours un qui aime, et l’autre qui se laisse aimer.” Handled
with marked fulness and breadth, and with a very painter-like choice of
the _tints_ of colour, the picture proves once again that Mr. Prinsep
is well qualified to work on a large scale; having at command a fund
of really pictorial material, on which he may draw with full stress
of faculty, secure that it will not fail him at his need. As a matter
of sentiment, the picture leaves a certain feeling of discontent; the
impassivity of the woman is so extreme as to provoke one first with
her and next with her impassioned adorer. But no doubt this is only
what the artist intended. In some parts the surface may be considered
too smooth--as especially in the lady’s face, which has hardly the
pulpiness of flesh. Possibly, however, this impression would be
corrected could one examine the picture closer.

510. A. HUGHES--“_Sigh no more, Ladies, Sigh no more._”--Mr. Hughes’s
pictures are always full of refined sentiment; and this is eminently
so, and in all respects one of his best successes. The lady is so
tender, uncomplaining, and beautiful, that one takes her part on
the instant. Happily, she seems, after an interval of disconsolate
dejection, to be dimly awaking once more to the interests of life; and
soon she will be taking the advice of the song, and tempting fate with
another affair of the heart. She is at once sentimental to the romantic
point, and domestically feminine. It was a happy thought to introduce
the thrush at her window, trilling a cheerful ditty, which one can
imagine that her heart translates into the spoken language of the song.
This picture has in it a gentle but real poetry which places it on a
very different footing from most of the work in the exhibition.

511. STOREY--_Saying Grace._--The small denizens of a nursery have
seated themselves with impeccable propriety for their early dinner,
regulated by (as one might infer from her physiognomy) a foreign
nursery-governess. The baby has joined his hands with dispread fingers,
and enacts (he is too young to pronounce) the grace with a solemnity
which would do credit to a parish-clerk. No doubt the children are all
portraits, with inordinate heads of hair; but the baby’s irregularity
of contour seems to exceed infantine bounds. Let us trust that his
mamma will insist upon his growing up with a modified profile, and
that “’tis his nature to.” The picture has a genuine distinction of
quaintness and zest.

513. CALDERON--_Œnone._--Mr. Tennyson, with the magic fetters of
genius, has enslaved all Englishmen to the conviction that Œnone can
only be contemplated as in a state of heartbroken dereliction; and I
suppose that Mr. Calderon intends his nymph to be so understood. I
cannot, however, perceive that sentiment in her face or action; she
appears to the eye rather in a mood of rampant laziness and florid
self-display. This is a very singular piece of colour. White or
whiteish tints occupy a considerable space; the extremely blue hills
are the second important constituent; and the pea-green mantle of
Œnone is the third. The pea-green appears to me a discord, though some
other hue of green, along with a texture more like drapery, might
have proved much the reverse. On the whole, I should say that, in its
colour as in other respects, the painting has much boldness, with no
corresponding proportion of felicity.

517. R. CARRICK--_After the Sortie._--This is a very large picture,
hung so high that one cannot fully estimate it in detail. It represents
a wounded knight borne up the winding castle-stairs by three of his
retainers; his wife, with a horrible sinking of the heart, totters and
clings about for support as she follows. It seems to be a strongly
designed and carefully executed work, of very superior merit; the most
important production of Mr. Carrick, and about the best.

524. H. W. B. DAVIS--_A Summer Forenoon._--A landscape and sheep-piece,
warm, gentle, and genial. Landscape and the allied forms of art occupy
a very small space, comparatively, in the present exhibition. There are
nevertheless several works of this kind which call for examination and
praise: their being left unnoticed in this pamphlet does not imply any
indifference to their merits.

540. MISS M. E. FREER--_Red Roses._--Coquetry is the predominant
spirit of this work. But it is not painted with the slightness which
a coquettish picture from a fresh female hand might be expected to
display. On the contrary, there is a good deal of careful realization,
and an amount of general skill and force which places Miss Freer high
among lady artists. No. 446, _Margaret Wilson_, by the same painter,
hung too high to be scrutinized, seems to be equally good, or better.

585. MACLISE--_Madeline after Prayer._--The useful adage which Mr.
Maclise will never lay to heart is that “Enough is as good as a feast.”
We find Keats’s Madeline encumbered with items of furniture and
ornamentation. Moreover, the painter’s decorative taste is anything
but chastened; witness the horrible pattern which she has begun in her
broidery frame. A graver objection is the want of any real luminosity
in the moonlight which Keats has made so resplendent; the painted
window itself is the very maximum of opacity, and the light (if light
it can be called) seems to fall _upon_ it, not to be transmitted
through its panes. Whatever his failings in execution, Mr. Maclise
can depict light vastly better than this when he chooses. So much for
objections. After any quantity of them, it remains that the picture is
highly attractive, and the Madeline a very beautiful creature--perhaps
the sweetest woman Mr. Maclise has painted. She is a personage _not_
made

  “For human nature’s daily food,”

and yet she is sympathetic. To be that, she must be poetic also.

589. BURCHETT--_Measure for Measure._--Mr. Burchett follows up his
remarkable work of last year with another of corresponding importance.
Matured consideration, and strong powers of working and of development,
have gone to the making of this picture; which represents the great
crisis in the action of _Measure for Measure_, where the Duke of
Vienna, disguised as a friar, is revealed by the unwitting Lucio to
the eyes of the abashed Angelo and Escalus, and of the now almost
hopeless Isabella and Mariana. The story is told with much judgment and
penetration (so far as such a complicated story _can_ be told) by the
Duke’s vacated chair of state, with coronet and sceptre laid upon it,
between the seats of Escalus and Angelo; the young courtier, facing the
just uncowled Duke, and recognising him on the instant, and raising
his cap; the frothy bluster of Lucio dying out on his scared visage
as he gasps to see whom he has been mauling and traducing; and other
well-chosen and well-combined incidents. The countenance of the Duke is
German and searching; that of Escalus true to the good-natured cynicism
of the substantially upright old man; Isabella has much of the nun
about her. Angelo is, I think, too much the burly insolent oppressor;
for we must understand from the drama that he really looked and was
an abstinent Pharisee, led on by temptation and opportunity into
vilenesses quite unlike the man that all others and himself supposed
him to be. There is much able and accurate painting in this work,
though it would benefit by more breadth of general harmonizing.

600. PARSONS--_The Wayfarer._--A peculiar and delicate piece of subdued
execution, deserving of inspection; _so_ peculiar in its granulated
texture that it hardly proclaims itself to be oil-painting.

613. HICKS--_Escape of the Countess of Morton to Paris, with Henrietta,
infant Daughter of Charles I._--The most important and best production
of Mr. Hicks. Like Mr. Burchett’s picture, its incidents require to be
analysed one by one: when that process has been gone through, one finds
a great deal of ingenious skill standing to the painter’s credit.

614. PRINSEP--_A Study of a Girl Reading._--Mr. Prinsep deserves real
thanks for this painting. The girl is an exquisite person, and the
picture also may without flattery be called exquisite. It has a most
charming sense of the womanly in the maidenly. The fair one is about to
sit down to luncheon, but holds and reads her book up to the moment of
drawing in her chair. Perhaps she will violate etiquette by persisting
in “reading at meals:” and who will not forgive her?

621. A. MOORE--_Azaleas._--This will be remembered as one of the
_illustrations_ (as the French phrase it) of the Exhibition of 1868. It
presents, in life size, a Grecian lady (or at any rate Grecian-robed),
at a pot of azaleas, some of which she plucks and drops into a basin.
Whether or not azaleas were known to Grecian ladies, whether or not
they came from America, are questions not difficult of solution, but of
sublime indifference to Mr. Moore. (The flowers in Mr. Watts’s Grecian
picture, No. 323, are also, I apprehend, azaleas.) The study of the
blossom-loaded plant is most delicate and lovely; and the lady has
elevated classic grace, though her face hardly sustains comparison with
the rest of the picture. For a sense of beauty in disposition of form,
and double-distilled refinement in colour, this work may allow a wide
margin to any competitors in the gallery, and still be the winner. On
the other hand, it is proper to remember that such a painting as this
presupposes certain _data_ in art, which _data_ some people not wholly
unworthy of a hearing demur to: chiefly, it presupposes once for all
that that innermost artistic problem of how to reconcile realization
with abstraction deserves to be given up. How much could be said on
this question from differing points of view, I need not here indicate.
You linger long to look at Mr. Moore’s picture, and return to it again
and again: and that justifies him in taking, individually, the benefit
of one of those points of view. He unites with singular subtlety of
grace a phase of the evanescent to a phase of the permanent: colour and
handling which withdraw themselves from the eye with a suggestion (or,
as one might say, with a whisper), to statuesque languor and repose of
form.

624. BRETT--_Christmas Morning, 1866._--In scale combined with subject,
this is far the most important picture Mr. Brett has produced. We see
a manned boat and a wrecking ship upon the immense ocean, with its
swirling drift blown across like a tongue of tormented flame; and huge
volumes of grey cloud over the horizon, walling out from the sea the
gorgeous dawn of a new day, on fire with the blaze of sunlight. The
painting of the vast sea-surface is a very great effort of knowledge
and mastery, and a very successful one.

629. A. GOODWIN--_The Dead Woodman._--A picture of highly remarkable
effect, and poetic perception. A blue-grey bloom of sunset broods
luminously over all. The work has a kind of intellectual analogy to
the _Dead Stonebreaker_ which Mr. Wallis painted years ago: but in all
points of externals it is entirely different.

632. MILLAIS--_Souvenir of Velasquez_ (_Diploma-work deposited in
the Academy on his election as an Academician_).--It is not for an
outsider to surmise whether or not the Academicians court the deposit
of diploma-pictures which may have cost their painters, working with
the quick-handedness of a Millais, perhaps a couple of days’ labour.
However this may be, they have here got a diploma-picture of that
description, and an admirable one in its way it certainly is. The
resemblance to Velasquez is hardly such as to justify the title.

685. WATTS--_A. Panizzi, Esq._--That this is about the finest portrait
of the year need scarcely be specified, Mr. Watts being its author. It
was presented to Mr. Panizzi by the Officers of the British Museum,
on his retirement; and happily expresses, in the sitter, great powers
of work, long in active exercise, and now in well-earned repose. A
sketch-plan of the Museum reading-room forms an appropriate and not
undecorative device in the right-hand upper corner.

735. SANDYS--_Study of a Head._--We have now got out of the
oil-pictures, and have come to the drawings. This is an excellent
study of a wilful, tameless-spirited beauty, who bites her hair in
her gathering mood. Further on (816) is an equally well-done head
of _George Critchett, Esq._, a head that seems to teem with defined
calculation. It will be known to many besides myself that Mr. Sandys
sent to the Academy an oil-picture of Medea in an act of incantation,
not only worthy, but more than worthy, of his highly disciplined powers
and determined accomplishment. It has dropped out of the Exhibition
when the pictures came to be actually hung; leaving some food for
pondering to those who care for the higher and completer forms of
pictorial work. They may feel--and the feeling would be only enhanced
by some other things they may have heard, and a great deal of what
they see on the Academy walls--that an off-hand style of painting,
now predominant, has interests of its own clashing with those of some
graver phases of art; and that judicial equity in adjusting these
interests may sometimes be in default. Sir Francis Grant, detailing
after-dinner statistics, may fancy that the whole question is settled
by saying that there is space for so many pictures only, and that
so many more were sent in; but this is far from being the _dernier
mot_. Efficiency No. 1 and semi-efficiency No. 2 may be contending
for a residue of space, and the admission of either is obviously the
exclusion of the other; but he would be a very innocent President,
non-academician artist, or private and unprofessional person, who
should thence conclude that the Pompey and the Cæsar have coequal
claims, especially the Pompey. Anybody, who has experienced, written,
read, heard, or seen, even a little of this ever-recurrent hanging
controversy, loathes its very atmosphere, and gladly retreats from it,
seldom without a sense of protest, and a chafing at injustice.

753. J. F. LEWIS--_Bedouin Arabs._--One of the very finest studies of
the kind produced by a hand unrivalled in its own way.

943. MUNRO--_The Sisters._--We are now in the Sculpture Room. Mr. Munro
has earned great popularity and a defined position by works of this
class, in which groups of children are treated with some graceful
incident and execution, and very genuinely graceful feeling. The
present group counts among the best of them.

948. WOOLNER--_Elaine with the Shield of Sir Launcelot._--The maiden
loves and muses, and pines as she muses; but as yet her doom only
hovers over her pityingly. The feeling of reserve and purity, of the
new experience of love timidly entertained, and yet already permeating
her whole life, and absorbing all her forces into its own surging and
resistless current, is predominant in this figure. Along with this,
and with much simplicity of pose and motive, one readily perceives
that the whole thing is uncommonly treated--_uncommonly_ rather than
_unusually_. The face has more of personal individuality, the turn
of the figure more shades of variety within unity, the execution
throughout more distinction, than British sculpture accustoms us to. So
also with the hands and feet: their peculiarities are all significant
and forecast, though to my eye they do not sufficiently partake of
the beauty of delicacy. Compare--or contrast would be the word--this
statuette with

981. J. S. WESTMACOTT--_Elaine._

984. ARMSTEAD--_Astronomy._--A bronze colossal figure, destined for the
Prince-Consort memorial in Hyde Park. It has a good decorative look,
and adequate grandeur of pose and line. It might fairly (so far as one
can judge before it is placed _in situ_) be termed a _proportional_
work; one, that is, in which the conception, treatment, and general
force of impression, have relation to its scale, and to its destination
as one in a series of impersonating figures.

987. LEIFCHILD--_The Dawn._--The sentiment of this figure is well
expressed in two lines from the MS. quotation:--

 “The Dawn, whose splendour is a promise still,
  Heralding more than Day can e’er fulfil.”

It is the sentiment of an ushering-in, an announcement, something
to come. Mr. Leifchild has produced several sculptural works eminent
for thoughtfulness in concentration. The present figure belongs to a
different order of work, yet something of the same spirit can be traced
in it.

1007. WOOLNER--_Thomas Carlyle._--The strong, emphatic, penetrating
style of Mr. Woolner, who searches under the surface of his sitter’s
face, and records on its surface what he has found beneath, gave
him the best of rights to deal with such a magnificent head as
Carlyle’s--marked as that is by a most powerful dominating expression,
with abundant points of subordinate detail and individuality. Mr.
Woolner had, indeed, done a medallion of the great writer many years
ago; now we get a bust worthily recording so memorable a man.

1027. WOOLNER--_Reliefs from the Iliad_ (_pedestal of the Bust of the
Right Honourable W. E. Gladstone_).--Here are three subjects executed
on a small scale, with a singular amount of original force. The third,
_Thetis consoling Achilles_, does not appear to me, in composition and
suggestion, so remarkable as the other two. _Pallas and Achilles at the
Trenches_, where the hero shouts to the Greeks a superhuman cry, while
Pallas overshadows him with her ægis, is a most vigorous and admirable
composition; indeed, but for its small size, one would be minded to
call it the finest thing Mr. Woolner has yet exhibited. _Thetis praying
to Zeus on behalf of Achilles_ is hardly second to it. The sea-goddess
rises on tiptoe to stroke the beard of the omnipotent cloud-compeller;
and no single touch perhaps could have given the amplitude and
primitiveness of the Homeric Pantheon more keenly than this. It is not
exactly _naïveté_, and still less exactly humour, but something happily
between both.

1053. WATTS--_Clytie_; _Marble Bust, unfinished._--This is an
experiment in sculpture by our distinguished painter. I find it a very
interesting one, and (_pace_ the professional sculptors) a remarkable
success. The head reverts over the right shoulder with a graceful and
energetic turn; and these qualities, especially that of energy, are
preserved in all points of view. The modelling of the bust and arms is
pulpy and creased--more comparable in tendency to that of the Elgin
Marbles than of later Greek sculpture. Indeed, I should surmise that
the thoughts of Mr. Watts, as he worked, were mostly shared between
Phidias and Michael Angelo. The spectator who finds some parts lumpy or
rude should bear in mind that the work is avowedly “unfinished”--even
if he does not deem the general conditions under which the experiment
has been made sufficient to abate the picking of holes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Possibly some readers of this pamphlet may use it to be referred to as
they range through the Academy rooms, examining their contents. If this
is the case, I should regret to pass over without a word of mention
several works which, according to the scope and limitations of the
pamphlet, I have not found an opportunity of reviewing in any detail in
their proper order. After all, a great number of works against whose
skilfulness and merit I neither raise nor suggest any imputation will
be remaining totally unnamed. Meanwhile, a simple numerical list of
contributions may be added to which I would rather direct attention
thus barely than not at all. Some of them are productions of leading
importance: others have modest graces which should not pass unobserved.
The visitor must form his own opinion of whether and why they deserved
specification.

    28. SWINTON--_The Earl Bathurst._
    29. T. S. COOPER--_Descending from the Rock Grazing,
          East Cumberland._
    49. MAC WHIRTER--_Old Edinburgh, Night._
    67. GRANT--_Miss Grant._
    68. FLEUSS--_G. Makgill, Esq._
   120. GRACE--_The Curfew tolls the Knell of parting Day._
   124. GRANT--_The Earl of Bradford._
   158. EDEN--_On the Thames near Pangbourne._
   160. HARVEYMORE--_The Point, near Walton on the Naze._
   168. J. B. BURGESS--_A Portrait._
   170. H. MOORE--_Ebb-tide, Squall coming on._
   176. CATHELINAU--_The Nurse._
   184. HALLE--_Miss Jessie._
   199. E. GILL--_Storm and Shipwreck on a Rocky Coast._
   205. ELMORE--“_Two Women shall be grinding at the Mill._”
   206. ZUCCOLI--_Wine Gratis._
   208. Ditto--_Preparing to cook Indian Corn._
   222. YEAMES--_The Chimney-Corner._
   241. LEHMANN--_Portrait of a Gentleman._
   251. NICOL--_A China Merchant._
   267. GOODALL--_Mater Purissima._
   272. ARCHER--_Burial of Guinevere._
   290. WATTS--_The Meeting of Jacob and Esau._
   298. V. COLE--_Sunlight Lingering on the Autumn Woods._
   303. WELLS--_James Stansfeld, Esq., of Halifax._
   321. POTT--_The Minuet._
   322. G. D. LESLIE--_Mrs. Charles Dickens, Jun._
   327. PRINSEP--_A Portrait._
   340. FRITH--_Scene from “She Stoops to Conquer.”_
   344. PERUGINI--_Daphne._
   345. MRS. ROBBINSON--_The Firstborn._
   346. RADFORD--_“No Man that Warreth” &c._
   348. LUCY--_The Forced Abdication of Mary Stuart._
   367. MISS A. THORNYCROFT--_Study of a Head._
   378. BOUGHTON--_A Breton Pastoral._
   387. WYLLIE--_Dover Castle and Town._
   390. CALTHROP--_The Last Song of the Girondins, 1793._
   400. ORCHARDSON--_Scene from “King Henry IV.”_
   403. STANHOPE--_The Footsteps of the Flock._
   416. WHAITE--_Harvest on the Mountains._
   420. WADE--_A Stitch in Time._
   452. H. MOORE--_Weather Moderating after a Gale._
   467. MRS. WARD--_Sion House, 1553._
   474. CROWE--_A Chiffonnier._
   478. WELLS--_The Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne._
   490. E. FRÈRE--_La Sortie de l’Ecole des Filles._
   503. HEMY--_By the River Side, Antwerp._
   504. NICOL--_Waiting at the Cross-roads._
   520. ARMITAGE--_Herod’s Birthday Feast._
   521. LIDDERDALE--_The Exiled Jacobite._
   523. PRINSEP--_A Greek Widow at a Tomb._
   529. HILLINGFORD--_Before the Tournament._
   531. ARMSTRONG--_Daffodils._
   532. OPIE--_The Musical Genius._
   542. HAYLLAR--_Midsummer, Parham Hall, Suffolk._
   551. GALE--_Nazareth._
   552. GOLDIE--_A Child Martyr borne across the Roman Campagna
          to one of the Catacombs._
   571. MISS SANDYS--_Enid._
   579. CALDERON--_Whither?_
   580. MASON--_Netley Moor._
   615. HODGSON--_Off the Downs in the Days of the Cæsars._
   616. A. HAYWARD--_The Haunted House._
   636. J. E. WILLIAMS--_The Bishop of Gloucester._
   646. ARCHER--_Bringing home Fern, Evening._
   648. MCCALLUM--_Near the Buck Gates, Sherwood Forest._
   656. TOURRIER--_The Cloisters._
   657. G. D. LESLIE--_The Empty Sleeve._
   671. BRENNAN--_Via della Vita, Rome._
   673. CROWE--_Mary Stuart, February 8th, 1586._
   683. A. HUGHES--_Mrs. Edward Rhodes._
   689. LOBLEY--_Fancies in the Fire._
   727. R. DOYLE--_The Enchanted Tree._
   754. A. C. H. LUXMOORE--_Searching for Treason._
   763. J. F. LEWIS--_Camels._
   764. COUNT G. V. ROSEN--_A Street in Cairo._
   833. HARDWICK--_The Woods in Early Spring._
   908. E. EDWARDS--_Four Etchings, Wells, &c._
   915. C. N. LUXMOORE--_Pen and Ink Sketches from Nature._
  1001. WOOLNER--_Hon. W. E. Frere, late of Bombay._
  1029. Ditto--_The late Robert Leslie Ellis._
  1040. BÖHM--_Miss Cumberbatch._
  1052. AP GRIFFITH--_Cain preparing his Sacrifice._
  1106. G. A. LAWSON--_The Maiden’s Secret._
  1164. TUPPER--_Dr. Hyde Salter._
  1169. G. MORGAN--_Study of a Head._
  1194. LEIFCHILD--_The Rev. Thomas Jones._




_PART II._

  BY
  ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE.


I have been asked to note down at random my impressions of some few
among this year’s pictures. These I am aware will have no weight or
value but that which a sincere and studious love of the art can give;
so much I claim for them, and so much only. To pass judgment or tender
counsel is beyond my aim or my desire.

Returning from the Academy I find two pictures impressed on my memory
more deeply and distinctly than the rest. First of these--first of
all, it seems to me, for depth and nobility of feeling and meaning--is
Mr. Watts’ “Wife of Pygmalion.” The soft severity of perfect beauty
might serve alike for woman or statue, flesh or marble; but the eyes
have opened already upon love, with a tender and grave wonder; her
curving ripples of hair seem just warm from the touch and the breath
of the goddess, moulded and quickened by lips and hands diviner than
her sculptor’s. So it seems a Greek painter must have painted women,
when Greece had mortal pictures fit to match her imperishable statues.
Her shapeliness and state, her sweet majesty and amorous chastity,
recall the supreme Venus of Melos. In this “translation” of a Greek
statue into an English picture, no less than in the bust of Clytie,
we see how in the hands of a great artist painting and sculpture may
become as sister arts indeed, yet without invasion or confusion; how,
without any forced alliance of form and colour, a picture may share
the gracious grandeur of a statue, a statue may catch something of the
subtle bloom of beauty proper to a picture.

The other picture of which I would speak, unlike enough to this in
sentiment or in tone, has in common with it the loftiest quality of
beauty pure and simple. Indeed, of all the few great or the many
good painters now at work among us, no one has so keen and clear a
sense of this absolute beauty as Mr. Albert Moore. His painting is to
artists what the verse of Théophile Gautier is to poets; the faultless
and secure expression of an exclusive worship of things formally
beautiful. That contents them; they leave to others the labours and
the joys of thought or passion. The outlines of their work are pure,
decisive, distinct; its colour is of the full sunlight. This picture
of “Azaleas” is as good a type as need be of their manner of work.
A woman delicately draped, but showing well the gentle mould of her
fine limbs through the thin soft raiment; pale small leaves and bright
white blossoms about her and above, a few rose-red petals fallen
on the pale marble and faint-coloured woven mat before her feet; a
strange and splendid vessel, inlaid with designs of Eastern colour;
another--clasped by one long slender hand and filled from it with
flowers--of soft white, touched here and there into blossom of blue:
this is enough. The melody of colour, the symphony of form is complete:
one more beautiful thing is achieved, one more delight is born into the
world; and its meaning is beauty; and its reason for being is to be.

We all owe so much to Mr. Leighton for the selection and intention of
his subjects--always noble or beautiful as these are, always worthy of
a great and grave art; a thing how inexpressibly laudable and admirable
in a time given over to the school of slashed breeches and the school
of blowsy babyhood!--we owe him, I say, so much for this that it seems
ungracious to say a word of his work except in the way of thanks and
praise. I find no true touch of Greek beauty in the watery Hellenism
of his Ariadne: she is a nobly moulded model of wax, such a figure
as a mediæval sorceress might set to waste before a charmed fire
and burn out the life of the living woman. The “Actæa” has the charm
that a well-trained draughtsman can give to a naked fair figure; this
charm it has, and no other; it has also a painful trimness suggestive
of vapour-baths, of “strigil” and “rusma,” of the toilet labours of
a Juvenalian lady; not the fresh sweet strength of limbs native to
the sea, but the lower loveliness of limbs that have been steamed and
scraped. The picture of Acme and Septimius is excellently illustrative
of Mr. Theodore Martin’s verse; it is in no wise illustrative of
Catullus. I doubt if Love would have sneezed approval of these lovers
either to left or to right. As for detail, surely one arm at least of
his and one leg at least of hers are singular samples of drawing. In
his two other pictures Mr. Leighton has, I think, reached his highest
mark for this year. The majestic figure and noble head of Jonathan are
worthy of the warrior whose love was wonderful, passing the love of
woman; the features resolute, solicitous, heroic. The boy beside him is
worthy to stand so near; his action has all the grace of mere nature,
as he stoops slightly from the shoulder to sustain the heavy quiver.
The portrait of a lady hard by has a gracious and noble beauty, too
rare even among the abler of English workmen in this line.

The genius of Mr. Millais is of course a thing indestructible; but
all that can be done to deaden or distort it the Academy has done.
“They have scotched the snake, not killed it”--being as it is a
“Serpent-of-Eternity.” There is nothing here to recall the painter of
past years. There is no significance or depth, no subtlety of beauty;
there is the fit and equal ability of an able craftsman. The group of
three sisters is a sample of this excellent ability; no man needs to
be told that. There is no lack of graceful expressive composition;
there is no stint of ribbons and trimmings. There is a bitter want
of beauty, of sweetness, of the harmony which should hang about the
memories of men after seeing it as an odour or a cadence about their
senses: and this beauty, this sweetness, this harmony, all great and
all genuine pictures leave with us for an after-gust, not soon to pass
or perish. The picture called “Rosalind and Celia” gives us graver
and deeper offence. Of the landscape nothing evil shall be said, and
nothing good; but the figures cry aloud for remark and reprobation.
These women are none of Shakspeare’s. Think but in passing of the
fresh grace, the laughters as of April, the light delicate daring,
the tender and brilliant sweetness of the true “Ganymede;” what is
left of all this? She figures here as a fair-faced ballet-girl, with
a soul absorbed by the calf of her leg. And this dull, sickly, stolid
woman huddling heavily against her is Celia; this is the purest rarest
type that Shakspeare could give of heroic and sweet devotion; this is
she who alone even among his women could not live but in another’s
life. And Touchstone--can this sour ape-cheeked face be the face that
Jaques “met i’ the forest?” these the lips that rallied Corin and wooed
Aubrey? “Bear your body more seemly,” Touchstone. And with all this
debasement and distortion of Shakspeare’s figures, we do not even get
by way of amends a well-wrought piece of work; forget if you will the
names attached, this is still but an unlovely picture. It seems that
Mr. Millais has forgotten how to paint a lady; his women here all smack
of the side-scenes or the servants’ hall. Admirable for its strong sure
power of painting, the “Stella” is, nevertheless, pitiably vacuous.
If the sailors at Nelson’s tomb appeal somewhat overmuch to popular
sentiment of no deep or delicate kind, the picture is yet a noble one
and impressive. The faces are full of simple and keen feeling, of tacit
and loyal reverence. There is a superfluous ugliness in the two wooden
stumps; and perhaps the knack by which the light is arranged so as to
strike out severally from each pane of the glass lantern is too like
one of those petty feats which are as lime-twigs laid to catch the
eyes and tongues of the half-trained sightseers who jostle and saunter
through a gallery, pausing now and again to “wonder with a foolish face
of praise.” The worst of these pictures, painted by a meaner man, would
justly win notice and applause; but it is no small thing that a great
man should do no greater work than some of this. The clear eye and the
strong hand have not forgotten their cunning; it is a master whom we
find too often at work fit only for a craftsman. Surely a painter who
has done things so noble will not always be content to take for his
battle-cry, “Philistia, be thou glad of me.”

I return now to the works of Mr. Watts. His little landscape is full
of that beauty which lives a dim brief life between sunset and dusk.
The faint flames and mobile colours of the sky, the dim warm woods, the
flight of doves about the dovecote, have all their part in the grave
charm of evening, are all given back to the eye with the grace and
strength of a master’s touch; the stacks that catch the glare and glow
of low sunlight seem crude and violent in their intense yellow colour
and hard angles of form: natural it may be, but a natural discord that
jars upon the eye. “The Meeting of Jacob and Esau,” though something
too academic, has in part the especial, the personal grandeur of Mr.
Watts’s larger manner of work. In the pale smooth worn face of Jacob
there is a shy sly shame which befits the supplanter: his well-nigh
passive action, as of one half reassured and half abashed, bares to
view the very heart and root of his nature; and the rough strenuous
figure of Esau, in its frank grandeur of brave sun-brown limbs, speaks
aloud on the other side of the story, by the fervid freedom of his
impetuous embrace. Far off, between the meeting figures, midmost of the
remote cavalcade, the fair clear face of a woman looks out, pale under
folds of white, patient and ill at ease; her one would take to be Leah.
It is noticeable that one year, not over rich in excellent work, should
give us two admirable pictures drawn from the Hebrew chronicles. What
they call scriptural art in England does not often bear such acceptable
fruit. I know not if even Mr. Watts has ever painted a nobler portrait
than this of Mr. Panizzi; it recalls the majestic strength and depth of
Morone’s work: there is the same dominant power of hand and keenness of
eye, the same breadth and subtlety of touch, the same noble reticence
of colour.

Before I pass on to speak of any other painter, I will here interpolate
what I have to say of Mr. Watts’s bust of Clytie. Not imitative, not
even assimilative of Michel Angelo’s manner, it yet by some vague
and ineffable quality brings to mind his work rather than any Greek
sculptor’s. There is the same intense and fiery sentiment, the same
grandeur of device, the same mystery of tragedy. The colour and the
passion of this work are the workman’s own. Never was a divine legend
translated into diviner likeness. Large, deep-bosomed, superb in arm
and shoulder, as should be the woman growing from flesh into flower
through a godlike agony, from fairness of body to fullness of flower,
large-leaved and broad of blossom, splendid and sad--yearning with
all the life of her lips and breasts after the receding light and the
removing love--this is the Clytie indeed whom sculptors and poets have
loved for her love of the Sun their God. The bitter sweetness of the
dividing lips, the mighty mould of the rising breasts, the splendour of
her sorrow is divine: divine the massive weight of carven curls bound
up behind, the heavy straying flakes of unfilleted hair below; divine
the clear cheeks and low full forehead, the strong round neck made for
the arms of a god only to clasp and bend down to their yoke. We seem to
see the lessening sunset that she sees, and fear too soon to watch that
stately beauty slowly suffer change and die into flower, that solid
sweetness of body sink into petal and leaf. Sculpture such as this has
actual colour enough without need to borrow of an alien art.

The work of M. Legros is always of such a solid and serious excellence
as to require no passing study. His picture of Henry VIII. and
courtiers is, I must think, an instance of absolute error; it has
no finer quality of its own, and the reminiscence of Holbein is not
fortunate. “The Refectory” makes large amends: he has never done more
perfect work than this. The cadence of colours is just and noble;
witness the red-leaved book open in one monk’s hand on the white cloth,
the clear green jug on the table, the dim green bronze of the pitcher
on the floor; beside it a splendid cat, its fur beautiful with warm
black bars on an exquisite ground of dull grey, its expectant eye and
mouth lifted without further or superfluous motion. The figures are
noble by mere force of truth; there is nothing of vulgar ugliness
or theatrical holiness. As good but not so great as the celebrated
“Ex-voto” of a past year, this picture is wholly worthy of a name
already famous.

The large work of Baron Leys stands out amid the overflow all round it
of bad and feeble attempts or pretences at work in all the strength
of its great quality of robust invention. It has the interest of
excellent narrative; in every face there is a story. A great picture
is something other than this; but this also is a great thing done. It
is a chapter of history written in colours; a study which may remind
us of Meinhold’s great romances, though the author of “Sidonia the
Sorceress” may stand higher as a writer than Leys as a painter. All the
realistic detail is here, but not the vital bloom and breath of action
which Meinhold had to give. Rigour of judicial accuracy might refuse to
this work the praise of a noble picture; for to that the final imprint
and seal of beauty is requisite; and this beauty, if a man’s hand be
but there to bestow it, may be wrought out of homely or heavenly faces,
out of rare things or common, out of Titian’s women or Rembrandt’s.
It is not the lack of prettiness which lowers the level of a picture.
Here for imagination we have but intellect, for charm of form we have
but force of thought. Too much also is matter of mere memory; thus
the clerk writing is but a bastard brother of Holbein’s Erasmus. Form
and colour are vigorous, if hard also and heavy; and when all is said
it must in the end be still accepted as a work of high and rare power
after its own kind, and that no common kind, nor unworthy of studious
admiration and grave thanksgiving.

It is well to compare this with the work that passes for historical in
many English eyes. Doubtless it may be said that such things as some of
these are not worth mention in a study so imperfect and discursive as
this must be; that they were better passed by in peace and left to find
their level. But it has been well said, “Il est des morts qu’il faut
qu’on tue;” and though undesirous in general to take that duty out of
abler hands, I will choose but one sample at random, on which I came by
chance, looking up from Sir E. Landseer’s dog and deer, a work of brute
ability, excellently repulsive as all brutish pain must be if duly
rendered. This select sample of historic art in England is a picture
of Mary Stuart about to sign her abdication. Posthumous parasites have
often libelled her with praise of pencil or of pen; but retribution
never yet fell heavier on her memory. She, the woman of such keen clear
wits, such indomitable nerves, such pitiless charms and such tameless
passions, that the very record of them can yet seduce and daunt men as
she daunted and seduced them of old--the fairest, subtlest, hardest
among women, with a heart of iron and fire--she shows here a fool’s
face, doubtful between a simper and a sob, raised in pitiable appeal
to a ring of stagestruck ruffians. The picture is worth notice as a
tangible piece of proof that certain men do really accept this as the
historic type of a figure so famous as hers. Another hand has drawn her
portrait, perhaps somewhat nearer life, to this effect; (I take leave
to cite the lines as a corrective, being reminded of them at sight of
this picture. They may perhaps find place here, as the Queen of Scots
figures thrice in this year’s show:)--

            “Nor shall men ever say
  But she was born right royal; full of sins,
  Dyed hand and tongue with bloody stains and black,
  Unmerciful, unfaithful, but of heart
  So high and fiery, and of spirit so clear,
  In extreme danger and pain so lifted up,
  So of all violent things inviolable,
  So large of courage, so superb of soul,
  So sheathed with iron mind invincible
  And arms unbreached of fireproof constancy--
  By shame not shaken, fear or force or death,
  Change, or all confluence of calamities--
  And so at her worst need beloved, and so,
  (Naked of help and honour when she seemed,
  As other women would be, of their strength
  Stript) still so of herself adorable,
  She shall be a world’s wonder to all time,
  A deadly glory watched of marvelling men
  Not without praise, not without noble tears,
  And if without what she would never have
  Who had it never, pity--yet from none
  Quite without reverence and some kind of love
  For that which was so royal.”

Having delivered my soul as to this matter, I return not unrelieved
from historic ground, with some hope that this aberration may prove
pardonable when the provocation has been taken into account.

I have compared Albert Moore to Théophile Gautier; I am tempted to
compare Mr. Leslie to Hégésippe Moreau. The low melodious notes of his
painting have the soft reserve of tone and still sweetness of touch
which belong to the idyllic poet of the Voulzie. Sometimes he almost
attains the gentle grace of the other’s best verse--though I hardly
remember a picture of his as exquisite for music and meaning as the
“Étrennes à la Fermière.” His work of this year has much of tender
beauty, especially the picture called “Home News;” his portraits have
always a pleasant and genuine quality of their own; and in the picture
called “The Empty Sleeve,” though trenching somewhat nearly on the
obvious and facile ground of family feeling and domestic exhibition,
there is enough of truth and grace visible to keep it up on the proper
level of art.

The “Evening Hymn” of Mr. Mason is in my mind the finest I have seen
of his works, admirable beyond all where all are admirable. A row of
girls, broken in rank here and there, stand and sing on a rough green
rise of broken ground; behind them is a wild spare copse, beyond it
a sunset of steady and sombre fire stains red with its sunken rays
the long low space of sky; above this broad band of heavy colour the
light is fitful and pale. The raised faces and opening mouths of the
singers are as graceful as those carved by Della Robbia or Donatello
in their choral groups; nothing visible of gape or strain, yet the
action of song is made sensible. Their fine features are not over fine;
they have all an air of the fields and the common country, which is
confirmed in the figures, cast in a somewhat ruder mould, of the two
young peasants who stand listening. One girl stands off a little from
the rest, conning the text with eyes set fast upon her open book; the
rest sing freely at large; the middle group of three girls is most
noble and exquisite. Rich at once and grave in the colour, stately and
sweet in the composition, this picture is a model of happy and majestic
temperance.

Mr. Walker’s picture of “Vagrants,” has more of actual beauty than
his “Bathers” of last year; more of brilliant skill and swift sharp
talent it can hardly have. The low marsh with its cold lights of grey
glittering waters here and there; the stunted brushwood, the late and
pale sky; the figures gathering about the kindling fire, sad and wild
and worn and untameable; the one stately shape of a girl standing
erect, her passionate beautiful face seen across the smoke of the scant
fuel; all these are wrought with such appearance of ease and security
and speed of touch, that the whole seems almost a feat of mere skill
rather than a grave sample of work; but in effect it is no such slight
thing.

In Mr. Armstrong’s “Daffodils” there is a still sobriety of beauty, a
quiet justice and a fine gravity of manner, far unlike the flash and
flare of obtrusive cleverness which vexes us so often in English work
of this kind. The sombre sweetness of a coming twilight is poured upon
hill and field; only the yellow flowers wreathed about the child’s
hat or held by the boy kneeling on the stile relieve the tender tone
of sunless daylight with soft and tempered colour. The action of the
figures has all the grace of simple truth and childlike nature.

“The Exiled Jacobite” of Mr. Lidderdale is full of the noble sadness of
the subject, excellent also as a genuine picture, a work of composed
harmony. The noble worn face of the old man, stamped with the sacred
seal of patience and pain, looks seaward over the discoloured stonework
of the low wall, beyond the dull grey roofs of a low-lying town that
slope to the foreign shore. His eyes are not upon the dusky down
sweeping up behind, the rough quaint houses and deep hollow, veiled all
and blue with the misty late air; they are set, sad and strong, upon
things they shall never see indeed again. From the whole figure the
spirit of the old song speaks:

  “Now all is done that man can do,
     And all is done in vain.”

The pathos of the picture is masculine and plain as truth; the painter
might have written under it the simple first words of the same most
noble song:

  “It was a’ for our rightful king.”

Mr. Poynter’s picture of “The Catapult” has an admirable energy of
thought and handiwork; the force and weight of faculty shown in it
would be worthy remark if the result were less excellent. Excellent of
its kind it is, but not delightful; surprise and esteem it provokes,
but not the glad gratitude with which we should welcome all great work.
The labouring figures and the monstrous engine are worthy of wonder and
praise; but there is a want on the whole of beauty, a want in detail of
interest. The painter’s “Israel in Egypt” had more of both qualities,
though there is this year a visible growth of power; it left upon our
eyes a keen impression of gorgeous light and cruelty and splendour and
suffering; it had more room for the rival effects at once of fine art
and of casual sentiment.

The two pictures of Mr. Hughes show all his inevitable grace and tender
way of work; they are full of gentle colour and soft significance. The
smaller is to us the sweeter sample; but both are noticeable for their
clear soft purity and bright delicacy of thought and touch. In the
larger picture the bird singing on the sill, delicious as it would be
anywhere, has here a double charm.

There is a genuine force and a quaint beauty in Mr. Houghton’s
picture--portrait it can hardly be called--of a gentleman in his
laboratory. His other picture, of a boy lifting up a younger child
to smell a rose on the tree, while a kitten bounds at his feet, is
admirable for its plain direct grace of manner.

The head of a priest by Mr. Burgess has a clear air of truth and
strength; its Spanish manner recalls the style of Phillip, whom the
painter, it seems, has sought to emulate. Among the few portraits worth
a look or a word, is that of Mrs. Birket Foster by Mr. Orchardson;
though the showy simplicity be something of a knack, and the painting
of woodwork and drapery rather a trick of trade acquired than a test
of accomplished power, the work is so well done and the action so
plain and good as to bear and to reward a second look.

The show of this year is noticeably barren in landscape. Nothing is
here of Inchbold, nothing of Anthony. The time which can bring forth
but two such men should have also brought forth men capable to judge
them and to enjoy. Even here however the field is not all sterile:
there are two studies of sea by Mr. H. Moore, worthy to redeem the
whole waste of a year. One of these shows an ebbing tide before the
squall comes up; the soft low tumult of washing waves, not yet beaten
into storm and foam, but weltering and whitening under cloud and wind,
will soon gather power and passion; as yet there is some broken and
pallid sunlight flung over it by faint flashes, which serve but to show
the deepening trouble and quickening turmoil of reluctant waters. The
shifting and subtle colours of the surging sea and grey blowing sky are
beautiful and true. The study of storm subsiding as the waves beat up
inshore, though vigorous and faithful, is in parts somewhat heavy; but
the jostling breakers muster and fight and fall with all the grace and
force of nature.

In these stray notes I had meant to set down nothing in dispraise of
this picture or that, but merely to say of such as I found good the
best I had to say; passing by of necessity many well worthy of praise
or blame, and many more not wholly worthy of either. Of these indeed
the main part of an exhibition must usually be made up; of mediocrities
and ingenuities which art must on the whole ignore and put aside
without rebuke, though they may not call aloud for fire to consume
them. But a word may here be said of M. Édouard Frère; a name that
carries weight with it. He has been likened to Wordsworth; it must be
a Wordsworth shorn of his beams. In the large field of the poet there
are barren and weedy places enough; he may at times, with relaxed hand
and bedimmed eye, drop from the hills to the quagmires, and croak there
to children, instead of singing to men; but the qualities which at such
times a great poet may have in common with a small painter are not the
qualities which make him great. When we find in M. Frère the majesty
and music of thought, the stately strength and high-toned harmonies,
the deep sure touch and keen-edged pathos of the poet, then only we may
grant the kinship. To the rags and tatters, the stubble and sweepings
of Wordsworth, he meantime is more than welcome. What is there in this
year’s picture well conceived, well composed, well painted? what of
effect, of harmony, of variety in these crude monotonous figures? A
great artist in verse or in colour may assuredly make some great thing
out of the commonest unwashed group of dull faces; but the workman must
first be great; and this workman, without force of hand or delicacy,
without depth or grace of painting, would pass off on us, in lieu of
these, such mere trickeries of coarse and easy sentiment, fit only
to “milk the maudlin” eyes of M. Prudhomme and his wife. Turn from
his work to that of M. Legros, and compare the emasculate with the
masculine side of French art.

Among the drawings here are two studies by Mr. Sandys, both worthy of
the high place held by the artist. One is a portrait full of force
and distinction, drawn as perhaps no other man among us can draw; the
other, a woman’s face, is one of his most solid and splendid designs;
a woman of rich, ripe, angry beauty, she draws one warm long lock of
curling hair through her full and moulded lips, biting it with bared
bright teeth, which add something of a tiger’s charm to the sleepy and
couching passion of her fair face. But of that which is not here I have
also something to say. Exclusion and suppression of certain things in
the range of art are not really possible to any academy upon earth, be
it pictorial or literary. It is natural for academies to try, when any
rare or new good thing comes before them in either kind; witness much
of academic history in England as in France; but the record of their
ill-will has always been the record of their impotence. Mr. Sandys’
picture of “Medea” is well enough known by this time, wherever there
is any serious knowledge of art, to claim here some word of comment,
not less seasonable than if it were now put forward to grace the great
show of the year. Like Coriolanus, the painter might say if he would
that it is his to banish the judges, his to reject the “common cry” of
academics. For this, beyond all doubt, is as yet his masterpiece. Pale
as from poison, with the blood drawn back from her very lips, agonized
in face and limbs with the labour and the fierce contention of old
love with new, of a daughter’s love with a bride’s, the fatal figure
of Medea pauses a little on the funereal verge of the wood of death,
in act to pour a blood-like liquid into the soft opal-coloured hollow
of a shell. The future is hard upon her, as a cup of bitter poison set
close to her mouth; the furies of Absyrtus, the furies of her children,
rise up against her from the unrisen years; her eyes are hungry and
helpless, full of a fierce and raging sorrow. Hard by her, henbane and
aconite and nightshade thrive and grow full of fruit and death; before
her fair feet the bright-eyed toads engender after their kind. Upon the
golden ground behind is wrought in allegoric decoration the likeness of
the ship Argo, with other emblems of the tragic things of her life. The
picture is grand alike for wealth of symbol and solemnity of beauty.

The present year has other pictures to be proud of, not submitted to
the loose and slippery judgment of an academy. Of one or two such I am
here permitted to make mention. The great picture which Mr. Whistler
has now in hand is not yet finished enough for any critical detail to
be possible; it shows already promise of a more majestic and excellent
beauty of form than his earlier studies, and of the old delicacy and
melody of ineffable colour. Of three slighter works lately painted,
I may set down a few rapid notes; but no task is harder than this
of translation from colour into speech, when the speech must be so
hoarse and feeble, when the colour is so subtle and sublime. Music or
verse might strike some string accordant in sound to such painting,
but a mere version such as this is as a psalm of Tate’s to a psalm of
David’s. In all of these the main strings touched are certain varying
chords of blue and white, not without interludes of the bright and
tender tones of floral purple or red. In two of the studies the keynote
is an effect of sea; in one, a sketch for the great picture, the soft
brilliant floor-work and wall-work of a garden balcony serve in its
stead to set forth the flowers and figures of flower-like women. In
a second, we have again a gathering of women in a balcony; from the
unseen flowerland below tall almond-trees shoot up their topmost
crowns of tender blossom; beyond and far out to west and south the
warm and solemn sea spreads wide and soft without wrinkle of wind. The
dim grey floor-work in front, delicate as a summer cloud in colour,
is antiphonal to the bluer wealth of water beyond: and between these
the fair clusters of almond-blossom make divine division. Again the
symphony or (if you will) the antiphony is sustained by the fervid or
the fainter colours of the women’s raiment as they lean out one against
another, looking far oversea in that quiet depth of pleasure without
words when spirit and sense are filled full of beautiful things, till
it seems that at a mere breath the charmed vessels of pleasure would
break or overflow, the brimming chalices of the senses would spill
this wine of their delight. In the third of these studies the sea is
fresher, lightly kindling under a low clear wind; at the end of a pier
a boat is moored, and women in the delicate bright robes of eastern
fashion and colour so dear to the painter are about to enter it; one
is already midway the steps of the pier; she pauses, half unsure of
her balance, with an exquisite fluttered grace of action. Her comrades
above are also somewhat troubled, their robes lightly blown about by
the sea-wind, but not too much for light laughter and a quivering
pleasure. Between the dark wet stair-steps and piles of the pier the
sweet bright sea shows foamless here and blue. This study has more of
the delight of life than the others; which among three such may be most
beautiful I neither care to guess nor can. They all have the immediate
beauty, they all give the direct delight of natural things; they seem
to have grown as a flower grows, not in any forcing house of ingenious
and laborious cunning. This indeed is in my eyes a special quality of
Mr. Whistler’s genius; a freshness and fulness of the loveliest life
of things, with a high clear power upon them which seems to educe a
picture as the sun does a blossom or a fruit.

It is well known that the painter of whom I now propose to speak has
never suffered exclusion or acceptance at the hand of any academy. To
such acceptance or such rejection all other men of any note have been
and may be liable. It is not less well known that his work must always
hold its place as second in significance and value to no work done by
any English painter of his time. Among the many great works of Mr. D.
G. Rossetti, I know of none greater than his two latest. These are
types of sensual beauty and spiritual, the siren and the sibyl. The one
is a woman of the type of Adam’s first wife; she is a living Lilith,
with ample splendour of redundant hair;

                      She excels
  All women in the magic of her locks;
  And when she winds them round a young man’s neck
  She will not ever set him free again.

Clothed in soft white garments, she draws out through a comb the heavy
mass of hair like thick spun gold to fullest length; her head leans
back half sleepily, superb and satiate with its own beauty; the eyes
are languid, without love in them or hate; the sweet luxurious mouth
has the patience of pleasure fulfilled and complete, the warm repose of
passion sure of its delight. Outside, as seen in the glimmering mirror,
there is full summer; the deep and glowing leaves have drunk in the
whole strength of the sun. The sleepy splendour of the picture is a fit
raiment for the idea incarnate of faultless fleshly beauty and peril
of pleasure unavoidable. For this serene and sublime sorceress there
is no life but of the body; with spirit (if spirit there be) she can
dispense. Were it worth her while for any word to divide those terrible
tender lips, she too might say with the hero of the most perfect and
exquisite book of modern times--_Mademoiselle de Maupin_--“Je trouve
la terre aussi belle que le ciel, et je pense que la correction de la
forme est la vertu.” Of evil desire or evil impulse she has nothing;
and nothing of good. She is indifferent, equable, magnetic; she charms
and draws down the souls of men by pure force of absorption, in no wise
wilful or malignant; outside herself she cannot live, she cannot even
see: and because of this she attracts and subdues all men at once in
body and in spirit. Beyond the mirror she cares not to look, and could
not.

  “Ma mia suora Rahel mai non si smaga
   Dal suo miraglio, e siede tutto ’l giorno.”

So, rapt in no spiritual contemplation, she will sit to all time,
passive and perfect: the outer light of a sweet spring day flooding
and filling the massive gold of her hair. By the reflection in a deep
mirror of fervent foliage from without, the chief chord of stronger
colour is touched in this picture; next in brilliance and force of
relief is the heap of curling and tumbling hair on which the sunshine
strikes; the face and head of the siren are withdrawn from the full
stroke of the light.

After this faint essay at an exposition, the weighty and melodious
words in which the painter has recast his thought (words inscribed
on the frame of the picture) will be taken as full atonement for my
shortcomings; I fear only that the presumption and insufficience of the
commentator will now be but the more visible.


LADY LILITH.

  Of Adam’s first wife, Lilith, it is told
    (The witch he loved before the gift of Eve)
    That, ere the snake’s, her sweet tongue could deceive,
  And her enchanted hair was the first gold.
  And still she sits, young while the earth is old,
    And, subtly of herself contemplative,
    Draws men to watch the bright net she can weave,
  Till heart and body and life are in its hold.

  Rose, foxglove, poppy, are her flowers: for where
    Is he not found, O Lilith, whom shed scent
  And soft-shed kisses and soft sleep shall snare?
    Lo! as that youth’s eyes burned at thine, so went
    Thy spell through him, and left his straight neck bent,
  And round his heart one strangling golden hair.

The other picture gives the type opposite to this; a head of serene and
spiritual beauty, severe and tender, with full and heavy hair falling
straight in grave sweet lines, not like Lilith’s exuberant of curl
and coil; with carven column of throat, solid and round and flawless
as living ivory; with still and sacred eyes and pure calm lips; an
imperial votaress truly, in maiden meditation: yet as true and tangible
a woman of mortal mould, as ripe and firm of flesh as her softer and
splendid sister. The mystic emblems behind her show her power upon
love and death to make them loyal servants to the law of her lofty and
solemn spirit. Here also the artist alone should first be heard; and
I, having leave to act as his outrider, give him the due precedence.

SIBYLLA PALMIFERA.

  Under the arch of life, where love and death,
    Terror and mystery, guard her shrine, I saw
    Beauty enthroned; and though her gaze struck awe,
  I drew it in as simply as my breath.
  Hers are the eyes which, over and beneath,
    The sky and sea bend on thee,--which can draw,
    By sea or sky or woman, to one law,
  The allotted bondman of her palm and wreath.

  This is that Lady Beauty, in whose praise
    Thy voice and hand shake still,--long known to thee
      By flying hair and fluttering hem,--the beat
      Following her daily of thy heart and feet,
    How passionately and irretrievably,
  In what fond flight, how many ways and days!

After these all weaker words must fall flat enough; but something of
further description may yet be allowed. Behind this figure of the ideal
and inaccessible beauty, an inlaid wall of alternate alabaster and
black marble bears inwrought on its upper part the rival twin emblems
of love and death; over the bare carven skull poppies impend, and
roses over the sweet head with bound blind eyes: in her hand is the
palm-branch, a sceptre of peace and of power. The cadence of colour is
splendid and simple, a double trinity of green and red, the dim red
robe, the deep red poppies, the soft red roses; and again the green
veil wound about with wild flowers, the green down of poppy-leaves, the
sharper green of rose-leaves.

An unfinished picture of Beatrice (the Beata Beatrix of the Vita
Nuova), a little before death, is perhaps the noblest of Mr. Rossetti’s
many studies after Dante. This work is wholly symbolic and ideal; a
strange bird flown earthward from heaven brings her in its beak a
full-blown poppy, the funereal flower of sleep. Her beautiful head
lies back, sad and sweet, with fast-shut eyes in a death-like trance
that is not death; over it the shadow of death seems to impend, making
sombre the splendour of her ample hair and tender faultless features.
Beyond her the city and the bridged river are seen as from far, dim
and veiled with misty lights as though already “sitting alone, made
as a widow.” Love, one side, comes bearing in his hand a heart in
flames, having his eyes bent upon Dante’s; on the other side is Dante,
looking sadly across the way towards Love. In this picture the light is
subdued and soft, touching tenderly from behind the edges of Beatrice’s
hair and raiment; in the others there is a full fervour of daylight.
The great picture of Venus Verticordia has now been in great measure
recast; the head is of a diviner type of beauty; golden butterflies
hover about the halo of her hair, alight upon the apple or the arrow in
her hands; her face has the sweet supremacy of a beauty imperial and
immortal; her glorious bosom seems to exult and expand as the roses
on each side of it. The painting of leaf and fruit and flower in this
picture is beyond my praise or any man’s; but of one thing I will here
take note; the flash of green brilliance from the upper leaves of the
trellis against the sombre green of the trees behind. Once more it must
appear that the painter alone can translate into words as perfect in
music and colour the sense and spirit of his work.

VENUS VERTICORDIA.

  She hath it in her hand to give it thee,
    Yet almost in her heart would hold it back;
    She muses, with her eyes upon the track
  Of that which in thy spirit they can see.
  Haply, “Behold, he is at peace,” saith she:
    “Alas! the apple for his lips--the dart
    That follows its brief sweetness to his heart--
  The wandering of his feet perpetually!”

  A little space her glance is still and coy;
    But if she give the fruit that works her spell,
  Those eyes shall flame as for her Phrygian boy;
    Then shall her bird’s strained throat the woe foretell,
    And her far seas moan as a single shell,
  And through her dark grove strike the light of Troy.

Another work, as yet incomplete, is a study of La Pia; she is seen
looking forth from the ramparts of her lord’s castle, over the fatal
lands without; her pallid splendid face hangs a little forward, wan
and white against the mass of dark deep hair; under her hands is a
work of embroidery, hanging still on the frame unfinished; just touched
by the weak weary hands, it trails forward across the lap of her pale
green raiment, into the foreground of the picture. In her eyes is a
strange look of wonder and sorrow and fatigue, without fear and without
pain, as though she were even now looking beyond earth into the soft
and sad air of purgatory: she presses the deadly marriage-ring into
the flesh of her finger, so deep that the soft skin is bloodless and
blanched from the intense imprint of it. Two other studies, as yet only
sketched, give promise of no less beauty; the subject of one was long
since handled by the artist in a slighter manner. It also is taken
from the Vita Nuova; Dante in a dream beholding Beatrice dead, tended
by handmaidens, and Love, with bow and dart in hand, in act to kiss
her beautiful dead mouth. The other is a design of Perseus showing to
Andromeda the severed head of Medusa, reflected in water; an old and
well-worn subject, but renewed and reinformed with life by the vital
genius of the artist. In the Pompeian picture we see the lovers at
halt beside a stream, on their homeward way; here we see them in their
house, bending over the central cistern or impluvium of the main court.
The design is wonderful for grace and force; the picture will assuredly
be one of the painter’s greatest.

Wide and far apart as lie their provinces of work, their tones of
thought and emotion, the two illustrious artists of whom I have just
said a short and inadequate word have in common one supreme quality of
spirit and of work, coloured and moulded in each by his individual and
inborn force of nature; the love of beauty for the very beauty’s sake,
the faith and trust in it as in a god indeed. This gift of love and
faith, now rare enough, has been and should be ever the common apanage
of artists. _Rien n’est vrai que le beau_; this should be the beginning
and the ending of their belief, held in no small or narrow sense,
but in the largest and most liberal scope of meaning. Beauty may be
strange, quaint, terrible, may play with pain as with pleasure, handle
a horror till she leave it a delight; she forsakes not such among her
servants as Webster or as Goya. No good art is unbeautiful; but much
able and effective work may be, and is. Mere skill, mere thought and
trouble, mere feeling or dexterity, will never on earth make a man
painter or poet or artist in any kind. Hundreds of English pictures
just now have but these to boast of; and with these even studious and
able men are often now content; forgetful that art is no more a matter
of mere brain-work than of mere handicraft. The worship of beauty,
though beauty be itself transformed and incarnate in shapes diverse
without end, must be simple and absolute; hence only must the believer
expect profit or reward. Over every building made sacred to art of any
sort, upon the hearts of all who strive after it to serve it, there
should be written these words of the greatest master now living among
us:--

  La beauté est parfaite,
  La beauté peut toute chose,
  La beauté est la seule chose au monde qui n’existe pas à demi.


THE END.




LONDON:

SAVILI, EDWARDS AND CO., PRINTERS, CHANDOS STREET, COVENT GARDEN.




KEATING’S COUGH LOZENGES.


[Illustration: KEATING 79 ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD

TRADE MARK]

The vast increase in the demand for these COUGH LOZENGES, and the
numerous Testimonials constantly received, fully justify the Proprietor
in asserting they are the best and safest yet offered to the Public
for the Cure of the following Complaints:--ASTHMA, WINTER COUGH,
HOARSENESS, SHORTNESS OF BREATH, and other PULMONARY MALADIES.

They have deservedly obtained the high patronage of their Majesties
the King of Prussia and the King of Hanover; very many also of the
Nobility and Clergy, and of the Public generally, use them under the
recommendation of some of the most eminent of the Faculty.

                  OLD BANK, STRATFORD-UPON-AVON,
  (Branch of the Stourbridge and Kidderminster Banking Company,)
                    STRATFORD, May 7th, 1868.


TESTIMONIAL.

DEAR SIR,--Having had a severe Cough this winter I was advised to try
your Lozenges, which are invaluable; having purchased one box costing
_only_ 1s. 1½d., completely set me up, and must, therefore, strongly
recommend them as a certain cure.

                                I remain your most obedient Servant,
                                    W. HOBBINS,
                                        Manager.

  To Mr. KEATING,
      79, St. Paul’s Churchyard, London.

Prepared and Sold in Boxes, 1s. 1½d., and Tins, 2s. 9d., 4s. 6d.,
and 10s. 6d. each, by THOMAS KEATING, Chemist, &c., 79, St. Paul’s
Churchyard, London. Sold retail by all Druggists and Patent Medicine
Vendors in the World.


KEATING’S PERSIAN INSECT-DESTROYING POWDER.

Fleas in dogs, poultry, &c., are instantly destroyed, as also Bugs,
Beetles, and every other Insect, by this Powder, which is quite
harmless to domestic animals; sportsmen particularly will, therefore,
find it invaluable.

Sold in Packets, 1s., Tins, 2s. 6d. and 4s. 6d. each; or 1s. Packets
free by post for 12 Postage Stamps, and 2s. 6d. on receipt of 36. Also
in Bottles, 1s. 2d., and with Bellows 1s. 6d. and 3s. each, by

  =THOMAS KEATING, Chemist, 79, St. Paul’s Churchyard, London, E.C.=


BY ROYAL COMMAND.

  [Illustration: Royal mark]

  [Illustration: Factory]

  JOSEPH GILLOT’S
  CELEBRATED
  STEEL PENS,

Sold by all Dealers throughout the World.




MR. EDWIN W. STREETER,

  LATE
  HANCOCK, BURBROOK, & COMPANY, LIMITED.

18-CARAT GOLD JEWELLERY MACHINE MADE.

FIFTY PER CENT. LESS THAN HAND MADE.

37, CONDUIT STREET (5 doors from Bond St.)

The Designs of the various Ornaments are exceedingly beautiful, being
for the most part classical. They are made of 18-carat Gold, and the
prices of some are as follows:--

  MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY,
  18 Carat Gold: Mr. Edwin W. Streeter--His Gold
  Suites                                £10 10s.

  MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY,
  18 Carat Gold: Mr. Edwin W. Streeter--His Gold
  Bracelets                               £5 0s.

  MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY,
  18 Carat Gold: Mr. Edwin W. Streeter--His Gold
  Brooches                                £3 0s.

  MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY,
  18 Carat Gold: Mr. Edwin W. Streeter--He Values
  Jewels at 1 per cent. for Probate; or Purchases,
  for Cash, and takes them in exchange.

  MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY,
  18 Carat Gold: Mr. Edwin W. Streeter--His Gold
  Lockets                                 £1 0s.

  MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY,
  18 Carat Gold: Mr. Edwin W. Streeter--His Gold
  Earrings                               £1 10s.

  MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY,
  18 Carat Gold: Mr. Edwin W. Streeter--His
  Etruscan Jewellery.

  MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY,
  18 Carat Gold: Mr. Edwin W. Streeter--His Book
  on Gold. Eighth Edition, 13 Stamps by Post.

  SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, & CO., and all Booksellers, and of
  the Author, 37, Conduit Street (five doors from Bond
  Street).


HANCOCK, BURBROOK, & CO. beg to announce a New and Recherche
Stock of Diamond-work and Jewellery for the present Season.
Every article marked in plain figures, and 10 per cent. discount
for Cash allowed on all articles above £5. Their special designs
of Machine-Made Necklaces, Earrings, and Bracelets.

COURT DIAMONDS RE-ARRANGED.


REVIEWS OF MR. EDWIN W. STREETER’S MACHINE-MADE JEWELLERY.

“_Professor Pepper states that the use of machinery in the manufacture
of Gold Ornaments is of great advantage to the Public._”--TIMES, 19th
October, 1867.

“_By the introduction of machinery 50 per cent. is saved in the
manufacture of Gold Jewellery._”--STANDARD, September, 1867.


“_Articles of 18-carat gold are manufactured by machinery, and the
result is a saving of 50 per cent. to the purchaser._”--FUN, 29th
December, 1866.

“_Mr. Edwin W. Streeter marks upon his goods the quality of gold
supplied by him._”--TIMES, 17th September, 1867.


REVIEWS OF MR. EDWIN W. STREETER’S BOOK OF JEWELLERY AND GOLD.

“_The description of the manufacture of Gold and the various Hall-marks
are well worth perusal._”--STANDARD, 3rd January, 1868.

“_This is a very useful little manual on Jewellery, of
importance._”--PUBLIC OBSERVER, 16th Nov., 1867.

“_This volume is worth its weight in gold._”--COURT JOURNAL, 9th Feb.,
1867.

“_Every intending buyer of Jewellery should make Mr. Streeter’s little
book his vade mecum._”--ILLUSTRATED NEWS, 30th November, 1867.




Transcriber’s Note:

Punctuation has been standardised; hyphenation has been retained as it
appears in the original publication.

The following changes have been made:

  Page 30
    1052. APGRIFFITH _changed to_
    1052. AP GRIFFITH

  Page 42
    But a word may here be said of M. Edouard Frère _changed to_
    But a word may here be said of M. Édouard Frère

  Page 47
    And soft-shed fingers and soft sleep shall snare? _changed to_
    And soft-shed kisses and soft sleep shall snare?





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES ON THE ROYAL ACADEMY EXHIBITION, 1868 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


