The Project Gutenberg eBook of The war drama of the Eagles
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The war drama of the Eagles
        Napoleon's standard-bearers on the  battlefield in victory and defeat from Austerlitz to Waterloo, a record of hard fighting, heroism, and adventure

Author: Edward Fraser

Release date: February 5, 2025 [eBook #75293]

Language: English

Original publication: London: John Murray, 1912

Credits: Brian Coe and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WAR DRAMA OF THE EAGLES ***





Transcriber’s Note: Italics are enclosed in _underscores_. Additional
notes will be found near the end of this ebook.




                             THE WAR DRAMA
                             OF THE EAGLES




[Illustration: PORTE-AIGLE, IMPERIAL GUARD, AND GRENADIER SERGEANT IN
PARADE UNIFORM.

From St. Hilaire’s _Histoire de la Garde Impériale_.]




                             THE WAR DRAMA
                             OF THE EAGLES

                   NAPOLEON’S STANDARD-BEARERS ON THE
                   BATTLEFIELD IN VICTORY AND DEFEAT
                      FROM AUSTERLITZ TO WATERLOO
                   A RECORD OF HARD FIGHTING, HEROISM
                             AND ADVENTURE

                            BY EDWARD FRASER

              AUTHOR OF “THE ENEMY AT TRAFALGAR,” “FAMOUS
             FIGHTERS OF THE FLEET,” “THE ‘LONDONS,’” ETC.


    “These Eagles to you shall ever be your rallying-point. Swear
    to sacrifice your lives in their defence; to maintain them by
    your courage ever in the path of victory.”--_On the Day of the
    Presentation on the Field of Mars._

    “The soldier who loses his Eagle loses his Honour and his All!”

              _Address to the 4th of the Line after Austerlitz._

    “The loss of an Eagle is an affront to the reputation of its
    regiment for which neither victory nor the glory acquired on a
    hundred fields can make amends.”

                      _55th Bulletin of the Grand Army_: 1807.
                                                       NAPOLEON.


                      WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAPS


                                 LONDON
                   JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
                                  1912




                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




PREFACE


This book breaks fresh ground in a field of romantic and widespread
interest; one that should prove attractive, associated as it is with
the ever-fascinating subject of Napoleon. Incidentally, indeed, it
may also help to throw a new sidelight on certain characteristics of
Napoleon as a soldier.

I venture to hope at the same time that it will arouse interest
further as offering independent testimony to the valour of our own
soldiers, the Old British Army which, under Wellington, defeated on
the battlefield the veterans of the Eagles whose feats of heroism and
hardihood are described in the book. Magnificent as were the acts of
fine daring and heroic endurance of the men whom Wellington led to
victory, no less stirring and deserving of admiration were the deeds of
chivalrous valour and stern fortitude done for the honour of Napoleon’s
Eagles by the gallant soldiers who faced them and proved indeed foemen
worthy of their steel. All who hold in regard cool, self-sacrificing
bravery and steadfast courage in adversity and peril will find no lack
of instances in the stories of what the warriors of the Eagles dared
and underwent for the name and fame of the Great Captain.

The record of Napoleon’s Eagles in war has never before been set forth,
and the centenary year of Badajoz and Salamanca and the Moscow Campaign
seems to offer a befitting occasion for its appearance.

The world, indeed, is in the midst of a cycle of Napoleonic
centenaries. Our own centenary memories of Talavera--the victory of
which Wellington said, in later years, that if his Allies had done
their part, “it would have been as great a battle as Waterloo”--of
Busaco ridge and Torres Vedras, of heroic Barrosa and desperate
Albuhera,--these are only just behind us. Immediately ahead lie the
centenaries of yet greater events. In less than a twelvemonth hence
England will mark the centenary of Vittoria, Wellington’s decisive day
in Spain, the crowning triumph of the Peninsular War; and yet more
than that in its import and sequel for Europe. It was the news of
Vittoria that, in July 1813, decided Napoleon’s father-in-law to throw
Austria’s sword into the balance against the Man of Destiny, compelling
Napoleon, with what remained of the Grand Army, to stand at bay for the
“Battle of the Nations” on the Marchfeldt before Leipsic. Within six
months from then, the world, in like manner, will recall the Farewell
of Fontainebleau, and Elba; and finally, in the year after that, the
British Empire will commemorate the epoch-making centenary of the
greatest of all British triumphs in arms on land--

     “Of that fierce field where last the Eagles swooped,
      Where our Great Master wielded Britain’s sword,
      And the Dark Soul the world could not subdue,
      Bowed to thy fortune, Prince of Waterloo!”

--the triple-event, indeed, of Waterloo, the _Bellerophon_, St. Helena.

The stories told here exist indeed, even in France, only in more or
less fragmentary form, scattered broadcast amongst the memoirs left
by the men of the Napoleonic time. They have not before been brought
together within the covers of a book.

I have utilised, in addition to the personal memoirs of Napoleon’s
officers, French regimental records, bulletins, and despatches (noted
in my List of Authorities), other official military documents,
contemporary newspapers, both British and foreign, and information
kindly placed at my disposal by the authorities of Chelsea Royal
Hospital and the Royal United Service Institution, and by friends
abroad.

                                                      EDWARD FRASER.




                               CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
  LIST OF AUTHORITIES                                                 XV


  CHAPTER I

  NAPOLEON ADOPTS THE EAGLE OF CAESAR                                  1


  CHAPTER II

  THE DAY OF THE PRESENTATION ON THE FIELD OF MARS                    16


  CHAPTER III

  IN THE FIRST CAMPAIGN:

      UNDER FIRE WITH MARSHAL NEY                                     60

      THE MIDNIGHT BATTLE BY THE DANUBE                               80


  CHAPTER IV

  ON THE FIELD OF AUSTERLITZ                                          96


  CHAPTER V

  IN THE SECOND CAMPAIGN:

      JENA AND THE TRIUMPH OF BERLIN                                 123

      THE TWELVE LOST EAGLES OF EYLAU                                150


  CHAPTER VI

  PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE:

      THE “EAGLE-GUARD”                                              181


  CHAPTER VII

  BEFORE THE ENEMY AT ASPERN AND WAGRAM                              197


  CHAPTER VIII

  “THE EAGLE WITH THE GOLDEN WREATH” IN LONDON                       214


  CHAPTER IX

  OTHER EAGLES IN ENGLAND FROM BATTLEFIELDS OF SPAIN                 240


  CHAPTER X

  IN THE HOUR OF DARKEST DISASTER:

      AFTER MOSCOW: HOW THE EAGLES FACED THEIR FATE                  263

      AT BAY IN NORTHERN GERMANY--1813                               291


  CHAPTER XI

  THAT TERRIBLE MIDNIGHT AT THE INVALIDES                            316


  CHAPTER XII

  THE EAGLES OF THE LAST ARMY                                        345


  CHAPTER XIII

  AT WATERLOO:

      “AVE CAESAR! MORITURI TE SALUTANT!”                            375

      HOW WELLINGTON’S TROPHIES WERE WON                             388

      THE LAST ATTACK AND AFTER: THE EAGLES OF THE GUARD             405

      THE EAGLES ANNOUNCE VICTORY TO LONDON                          424


  CHAPTER XIV

  AFTER THE DOWNFALL                                                 432


  INDEX                                                              437




                        ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAPS


                             ILLUSTRATIONS

  PORTE-AIGLE, IMPERIAL GUARD, AND GRENADIER SERGEANT IN PARADE
      UNIFORM                                             _Frontispiece_
    From St. Hilaire’s _Histoire de la Garde Impériale_

                                                             FACING PAGE
  MARSHAL MORTIER                                                     90

  MARSHAL SOULT                                                      104
    In the uniform of Colonel-in-Chief of the Chasseurs of the Guard

  MARSHAL DAVOUT                                                     134

  MARSHAL NEY WITH THE REARGUARD IN THE RETREAT FROM MOSCOW          282
    From a picture by A. Ivon, at Versailles
    Photo by Alinari

  NAPOLEON AND THE “SACRED SQUADRON” ON THE WAY TO THE BERESINA      288
    From the picture by H. Bellangé

  NAPOLEON’S FAREWELL TO THE OLD GUARD AT FONTAINEBLEAU              312
    From a print after H. Vernet, kindly lent by Messrs.
        T. H. Parker, 45, Whitcomb Street

  THE FIGHT FOR THE STANDARD                                         396
    Sergeant Ewart of the Scots Greys taking the Eagle of the
        45th at Waterloo
    From the picture by R. Andsell, A.R.A., at Royal Hospital,
        Chelsea

  THE SQUARE OF THE OLD GUARD AT BAY AFTER WATERLOO                  412
    From the picture by H. Bellangé

  LA REVUE DES MORTS                                                 434
    From a picture by R. Demoraine


                                 MAPS

  OUTLINE MAP OF NAPOLEON’S CONCENTRATION IN REAR OF ULM,
      SEPTEMBER 27 TO OCTOBER 18, 1805                                82

  SKETCH PLAN OF THE POSITIONS OF THE ARMIES AT THE OPENING OF
      THE BATTLE OF AUSTERLITZ                                        98

  SKETCH PLAN OF THE BATTLEFIELD OF EYLAU                            154

  PLAN OF THE BATTLE OF BARROSA                                      222

  WATERLOO. THE CHARGE OF THE UNION BRIGADE                          394

  WATERLOO--THE FINAL PHASE. SKETCH PLAN TO SHOW THE ATTACK AND
      THE DEFEAT OF THE COLUMNS OF THE GUARD                         410

  GENERAL MAP                                                        436




                          LIST OF AUTHORITIES


  ALISON: History of Europe.

  AVRILLON, PION DES LOCHES, PELET, COMBES, DU ROURE DE PAULIN,
      VIONNET, BERTIN, THIRION, NOEL, DUPUY, BLAZE, ST. CHAMANS,
      VIGÉE-LEBRUN, ETC.: Souvenirs.

  BARBOUX, GENERAL: War Services.

  BARDIN: Dictionnaire de l’Armée. BARDIN: Memorial de l’Officier.

  BEAMISH: The King’s German Legion.

  BEAUVAIS: Victoires des Français, 1792–1815.

  BERTHEZÉNE, GENERAL: Souvenirs Militaires.

  BIGNON: Memoirs of Napoleon’s Campaigns.

  BOUILLÉ: Les Drapeaux Français.

  BOURRIENNE: Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte.

  BUGEAUD, MARSHAL: Memoirs.

  BYRNE, MILES: Memoirs.

  Catalogue:--Heeres Museum--Wien.

  Catalogue:--Real Armeria--Madrid.

  CATHCART, HON. SIR C.: Commentaries--1812–13.

  CAULAINCOURT: Recollections.

  CHAMBRAY: History of the Russian Expedition.

  CHAMPEAUX: Honneur et Patrie.

  CHARBOUCLIÈRE: Dictionnaire de l’Armée.

  CHARRAS: Campagne de 1815.

  CHICHESTER and SHORT: Records and Badges of the British Army.

  COLBORN: United Service Journal (_passim_): Regimental Histories
      (British and French), etc.

  Correspondance Militaire de Napoléon.

  COTTON: A Voice from Waterloo.

  DALTON: The Waterloo Roll Call.

  Das Zeughaus zu Berlin.

  DAVOUT, MARSHAL: Memoirs.

  DE GONNEVILLE: Souvenirs Militaires.

  DEMMIN: Weapons of War.

  DESJARDINS: Recherches sur les Drapeaux.

  DE SUZANNE, GENERAL: L’Infanterie Française.

  DE SUZANNE, GENERAL: La Cavalerie Française.

  DUCASSE: Visite à l’Hôtel des Invalides.

  DUCOR: Aventures d’un Marin de la Garde.

  DUMAS, M.: Souvenirs Militaires.

  DUMAS, M.: Précis des Evènemens Militaires.

  FANTIN DES ODOARDS, GENERAL: Journal.

  FÉZENSAC: Journal of the Russian Campaign--1812–13.

  FÉZENSAC: Souvenirs Militaires.

  FOY, GENERAL: History of the War in Spain.

  GARDNER, DARSEY: Quatre Bras, Ligny, Waterloo.

  GLEIG: Narrative of the Battle of Leipsic.

  GOURGAUD: Napoleon and the Grand Army in Russia.

  GROSE: Military Antiquities.

  HOME: Précis of Modern Tactics.

  HOOPER: Waterloo: The Downfall of the First Napoleon.

  HOUSSAYE: Napoléon, Homme de Guerre.

  HOUSSAYE: Waterloo.

  JEANNENEY: Le Glorieux Passé d’un Régiment.

  JOMINI: L’Art de Guerre.

  JOMINI: Life of Napoleon I.

  JUNOT, MARSHAL: Memoirs.

  JURIEN DE LA GRAVIÈRE: Guerres Maritimes.

  LABAUME: History of the Campaign in Russia.

  LACROIX, D.: Les Maréchaux de Napoléon.

  LACROIX, D.: Histoire Anecdotique du Drapeau Français.

  LALLEMAND: Les Drapeaux des Invalides--1814.

  LAMARTINE: History of the Restoration.

  LANFREY: History of Napoleon I.

  LA VALETTE: Memoirs.

  LEJEUNE: Memoirs.

  LEMONNIER-DELAFOSSE: Campagnes de 1810–15.

  LYDEN: Nos 144 Régiments de Ligne.

  MACDONALD, MARSHAL: Recollections.

  MACGEORGE: Flags and their History.

  MARBOT: Memoirs.

  MARBOT et DE NOIRMONT: Costumes Militaires Françaises.

  MARMONT, MARSHAL: The Spirit of Military Institutions.

  MASSON: Cavaliers de Napoléon. MASSON: Livre du Sacre de l’Empereur.
      MASSON: Souvenirs et Recits des Soldats.

  MAXWELL, SIR H.: Life of Wellington. MAXWELL, SIR H.: Victories of
      the British Armies.

  MAXWELL, W. H.: Peninsular War Sketches.

  Memoirs of Sergeant Bourgogne.

  MENÉVAL: Memoirs.

  Military Costumes of Europe--1812.

  MILNE: Standards and Colours.

  MORVAN: Le Soldat Impérial.

  NAPIER: History of the Peninsular War.

  Narrative of Captain Coignet.

  NEY, MARSHAL: Memoirs.

  NIOX, GENERAL: Drapeaux et Trophées.

  ODELEBEN: Napoleon’s Campaign in Saxony, 1813.

  [Officially Published] Historiques des Régiments de l’Armée.

  [Officially Published] Publications de la Réunion des Officiers.

  OUDINOT, MARSHAL: Memoirs.

  PARQUIN: Campagnes d’un Vieux Soldat.

  PATTISON: Napoleon’s Marshals.

  PENGUILLY L’HARIDON: Catalogue Musée d’Artillerie.

  Potsdam und seine Umgebung.

  RAPP, GENERAL: Memoirs.

  REY: Histoire du Drapeau.

  ROBERT, COLONEL: Catalogue, Musée d’Artillerie.

  ROSE: Life of Napoleon I.

  ST. HILAIRE: Histoire de la Garde Impériale. ST. HILAIRE: Histoire
      Populaire de Napoléon I.

  SAVARY: Memoirs.

  SÉGUR: Au Drapeau. SÉGUR: History of the Expedition to Russia. SÉGUR:
      Memoirs. SÉGUR: Procès Verbal de la Couronnement de Napoléon.

  SERUZIER: Memoirs.

  SHAW KENNEDY, SIR JOHN: Notes on Waterloo.

  SHERER, MOYLE: Tales of the Wars.

  SHOBERL: Narrative of the Battle of Leipsic.

  SIBORNE: Campaign of Waterloo.

  SIBORNE: Waterloo Letters.

  SLOANE: Life of Napoleon I.

  SOULT, MARSHAL: Memoirs.

  SOUTHEY: History of the Peninsular War.

  STENDHAL: Journal and Correspondence.

  STOCQUELER: The British Soldier.

  TAYLOR, SIR HERBERT: Waterloo.

  THIÉBAULT, BARON: Memoirs.

  THIERS: Consulate and Empire.

  WELLINGTON: Despatches.

  WILSON, SIR R.: Narrative of Events in Russia, 1812. WILSON, SIR R.:
      Private Journal of the Russian Campaign.

  WOOD, SIR EVELYN: Cavalry in the Waterloo Campaign.


  (NOTE.--This list is approximately complete, representing about 90
      per cent. of the total of authorities consulted and laid under
      contribution.)




                      THE WAR DRAMA OF THE EAGLES




CHAPTER I

NAPOLEON ADOPTS THE EAGLE OF CAESAR


Napoleon Bonaparte became Emperor, “by Divine Will and the Constitution
of the French Republic”--Imperator and hereditary Caesar of the
Republic--on Friday, May 18, 1804. Three weeks later it was publicly
announced in the _Moniteur_ that the Eagle had been adopted as the
heraldic cognisance of the new _régime_ in France.

Its selection for the State armorial bearing of the Empire was one
of Napoleon’s first acts. That the Roman lictor’s axe and fasces
surmounted by the red Phrygian cap, with its traditions of revolution,
which had supplanted the Fleur-de-Lis of the Monarchy, and had served
as the official badge on the standards of the Republic and the
Consulate, should continue under the Imperial _régime_, was obviously
impossible. But what distinctive emblem should be adopted in its stead?

Napoleon had the question debated in his presence at the first _séance_
of the Imperial Council of State. He had, it would seem, not made up
his mind in regard to it. At any rate, a few days before the meeting
of the Council, he had directed a Committee to draw up a statement and
offer suggestions.

The matter was brought forward at the first meeting of the Imperial
Council, held at the Château of Saint-Cloud on Tuesday, June 12,
1804, after a preliminary discussion on the arrangements for the
Coronation, when and where it should be held, and what was to be the
form of ceremonial. The Coronation, all agreed at the outset, must
take place in the current year. Rheims, Aix-la-Chapelle, and Paris, in
turn, were suggested as suitable places for the ceremony, Paris being
finally decided on; the scene of the event to be the Champ de Mars.
Napoleon himself proposed the Champs de Mars, with a threefold ceremony
there--the taking of the constitutional oath, the actual coronation,
the presentation of the Emperor to the assembled people. A brief
discussion followed on the form of the coronation ceremony, whether it
should be accompanied by religious rites. It was put forward that, as
Charlemagne had received his authority from the Pope, might not the
Pope now be induced to visit Paris and personally crown the Emperor?
Napoleon, intervening in the discussion, made a strong point of the
necessity of some kind of religious service on the occasion. He did not
care much, he cynically remarked, what religion was selected; only it
must be in accordance with the views of the majority of the nation. It
would be impossible to do without some sort of religious observance. In
all nations, said he, Ceremonies of State were accompanied by religious
services. As to asking the Pope to take part, from his point of view,
at the moment, the attendance of a Papal legate would be preferable.
If the Pope himself came to Paris, his presence would assuredly tend
to relegate the Emperor to a secondary position: “Tout le monde me
laisserait pour courir voir le Pape!” The matter, however, as the
discussion proceeded, seemed to present so many difficulties, that
the Council, after declaring themselves generally against having any
religious ceremony at all, decided to leave the question for further
consideration.

On that the Council turned to deal with the selection of the heraldic
insignia and official badge of the Empire.

[Sidenote: THE GALLIC COCK PROPOSED]

Senator Crétet, on behalf of the special Committee appointed by
Napoleon to prepare a statement for the Council, presented his report.
The Committee, he said, had decided unanimously to recommend the Cock,
the historic national emblem of Ancient Gaul, as the most fitting
cognisance for Imperial France. Should that not find favour with the
Council, either the Eagle, the Lion, or the Elephant, in the opinion
of the Committee, might well be adopted. Individual members of the
Committee, added Crétet, had further suggested the Aegis of Minerva, or
some flower like the Fleur-de-Lis, an Oak-tree, or an Ear of Corn.

Miot, one of the members of the Council, rose as Crétet sat down, and
protested against the re-introduction of the Fleur-de-Lis. That, he
said, was imbecility. He proposed a figure of the Emperor seated on his
throne as the best possible badge for the French Empire.

He was not seconded, however, and Napoleon interposed abruptly to
set aside the Committee’s suggestion of reviving the Gallic Cock. He
dismissed that notion with a contemptuous sneer. “Bah,” he exclaimed,
“the Cock belongs to the farmyard! It is far too feeble a creature!”
(“Le Coq est de basse cour. C’est un animal trop faible!”) Napoleon
spoke rapidly and vivaciously. He had not yet, in those early days,
acquired the impressive Imperial style that he afterwards affected.
“His language at these earlier Council meetings was still impregnated
with his original Jacobin style; he spoke frequently, spontaneously,
familiarly; monologued at the top of his voice (avec des éclats de
voix); apostrophised frequently, appearing at times as though overcome
with nervousness, now almost in tears, now breaking out in a frenzy of
passion, unrestrainedly emphasising his personal likes and dislikes.”

[Sidenote: THE LION--THE ELEPHANT--THE BEE]

Count Ségur, Imperial Grand Master of the Ceremonies, suggested the
Lion as the most suitable emblem: “parcequ’il vaincra le Léopard,” he
explained.

Councillor Laumond proposed the adoption of the Elephant instead; with
for a motto “_Mole et Mente_.” The Elephant had a great vogue at that
day among European heraldic authorities as being pre-eminently a royal
beast. There was a widely prevalent belief, on the authority of old
writers on natural history, that an Elephant could not be made to bow
its knees. Further, too, the elephant typified resistless strength as
well as magnanimity. And had not Caesar himself once placed the effigy
of the Elephant on the Roman coinage? Nobody else at the Council,
however, seemed to care for the Elephant.

Councillor Simon objected to Ségur’s proposition, on the score that the
Lion was essentially an aggressive beast.

Cambacérès, ex-Consul and Arch-Chancellor of the Empire, suggested a
swarm of Bees as the most suitable national emblem. It would represent
the actual situation of France, he explained--a republic with a
presiding chief.

Councillor Lacuèe supported Cambacérès. The Bee, he added, was the
more suitable, in that it possessed a sting as well as being a maker of
honey.

Cambacérès remarked that he favoured the idea of the Bee as typifying
peaceful industry rather than offensive power.

The other members took no interest in the idea of the Bee, and after
some discursive talk the Council fell back on the Committee’s original
suggestion of the historic Gallic Cock. The general voice favoured the
adoption of the Cock, and they unanimously voted for it.

That, however, would not do for Napoleon. He sharply refused once more
to hear of the Cock in any circumstances. He had for some minutes sat
silent, listening to the discussion until the vote was taken. On that
he rose and banned the Cock absolutely and finally.

“The Cock is quite too weak a creature,” he exclaimed. “A thing like
that cannot possibly be the cognisance of an Empire such as France. You
must make your choice between the Eagle, the Elephant, and the Lion!”

The Eagle, however, did not commend itself to the Council. That emblem,
it was pointed out by several members, had been already adopted by
other European nations. For France, such being the case, the Eagle
would not be sufficiently distinctive. The German Empire had the Eagle
for its cognisance. So had Austria. So had Prussia. So had Poland
even--the White Eagle of the Jagellons. The Council was plainly not
attracted by the Eagle.

Lebrun, the other ex-Consul, Arch-Treasurer of the Empire, now put in
a word again for the Fleur-de-Lis. It had been, he said, the national
emblem of France under all the previous dynasties. The Fleur-de-Lis,
declared Lebrun, was the real historic emblem of France, and he
proposed that it should be adopted for the Empire.

Nobody, though, supported him, one member, Councillor Regnaud,
condemning the idea of the Fleur-de-Lis as utterly out of date. “The
nation,” added Regnaud, with a sneer, “will neither go back to the cult
of the Lilies nor to the religion of Rome!”

[Sidenote: “YOU MUST CHOOSE THE LION!”]

At that point Napoleon lost patience. Interposing to close the
discussion, he curtly bade the Council to cease from wasting time.
They must decide on the Lion for the Imperial Emblem. His preference
was for the figure of a Lion, lying over the map of France, with one
paw stretched out across the Rhine: “Il faut prendre un Lion, s’étendu
sur la carte de France, la patte prête à dépasser le Rhin.” Napoleon
proposed in addition, by way of motto, beneath the Lion-figure, these
defiant words: “_Malheur à qui me cherche!_”

No more was said on the subject after that. The Council submitted
forthwith to Napoleon’s dictation, and, as it would appear, without
taking any formal vote, passed to the remaining business of the day:
the inscription on the new coinage and certain amendments to the
Criminal Code.

But even then, as it befell, the decision as to the national emblem was
not conclusive. Napoleon changed his mind about the Lion shortly after
the Council had broken up. The Lion as the designated cognisance of
the French Empire did not last twenty-four hours. Napoleon himself, on
the report of the Council meeting being presented for his signature,
definitely rejected the Lion. He cancelled his own proposition with a
stroke of his pen. With his own hand the Emperor struck out the words
“Lion couchant,” with the reference to the map of France and the Rhine,
writing over the erasure, “Un Aigle éploye”--an Eagle with extended
wings. So Napoleon independently settled the matter.

Napoleon, as it would appear, in making his ultimate choice of the
Eagle, had this in his mind. Charlemagne was ever in his thoughts at
that time as his own destined exemplar. The Eagle of Charlemagne, it
was now borne in upon his mind irresistibly, had a pre-eminent claim to
be recalled and become the national heraldic badge for the new Frankish
Empire of the West, as having been the traditional emblem of Imperial
authority in the ancient Frankish Empire, the prototype and historic
predecessor of the Empire of which he was head. Said Napoleon, indeed,
in justifying his final adoption of the Eagle: “Elle affirme la dignité
Impériale et rappelait Charlemagne.”

[Sidenote: WHERE THE ARTIST GOT HIS DESIGN]

A commission to design the new Imperial Eagle “after that of
Charlemagne” was forthwith given to Isabey (the elder Isabey--Jean
Baptiste), “Peintre et Dessinateur du Cabinet de l’Empereur,” whose
reputation was at that moment at its zenith. The artist, however,
had no Carlovingian model to draw from, and nobody, it would appear,
could give him any advice. He had to depict “Un Aigle éployé”--a
Spread-Eagle. Discarding heraldic conventionalism, he produced the
Napoleonic Eagle of history; an Eagle _au naturel_, shown in the act of
taking wing. The idea of it Isabey took from a sketch he himself had
made nine years before, in the Monastery of the Certosa of Milan, of an
eagle sculptured on one of the tombs of the Visconti.

Following on his adoption of the Eagle for the cognisance of the Empire
at large, Napoleon announced that the Eagle would in future be the
battle-standard of the Army. He had, though, as to that Eagle, yet
another thought in his mind. For his soldiers he desired the French
Eagle to represent the military standard of Ancient Rome, the historic
emblem of Caesar’s legionaries, with its resplendent traditions of
world-wide victory. That intention, furthermore, Napoleon went out
of his way to emphasise significantly through the place and moment
that he chose for the promulgation of the Army Order appointing the
Eagle of the Caesars as the battle-standard of the French Empire. The
Imperial rescript was dated from the Camp of the “Army of the Ocean” at
Boulogne; from amidst the vast array of soldiers mustered there for the
threatened invasion of England.

At the same time Isabey’s design for one Eagle would suffice as a
model for the other. It sufficiently suggested the Roman type. Like
Charlemagne, had not Napoleon led his army across the Alps? like
Caesar, was he not about to lead it across the Straits?

“The Eagle with wings outspread, as on the Imperial Seal, will be
at the head of the standard-staves, as was the practice in the
Roman army--(_placée au sommet du bâton, telle que la portaient les
Romains_). The flag will be attached at the same distance beneath
the Eagle, as was the Labarum.” So Napoleon wrote in his preliminary
instructions from Boulogne to Marshal Berthier, Head of the Etat-Major
of the “Army of England,” at that moment on duty at the War Office in
Paris.

The Eagle, Napoleon directed, was of itself to constitute the standard:
“_Essentiellement constituer l’étendard_,” were Napoleon’s words. He
set a secondary value on the flag which the Eagle surmounted. The flag
to Napoleon was a subsidiary adjunct.

[Sidenote: THE FLAG OF MINOR ACCOUNT]

Flags, of course, would come and go. They could be renewed, he wrote,
as might be necessary, at any time; every two years, or oftener. The
Eagle, on the other hand, was to be a permanency. It was to be for
all time the standard of its corps: also, to add still further to its
sacrosanct nature and _éclat_, every Eagle would be received only from
the hands of the Emperor.[1]

Every Battalion of Foot and Squadron of Horse was to have its Eagle,
which, on parade and before the enemy under fire, would be in the
special charge of the battalion or squadron sergeant-major, with
an escort of picked veteran soldiers; “men who had distinguished
themselves on the battlefield in at least two combats.”

Exceptional care, Napoleon laid down, was to be taken by regimental
commanders that no harm should befall the Eagle. In the event of
accident happening to it, a special report was to be made direct to
the Emperor. Should it unfortunately happen that the Eagle was lost in
battle, the regiment concerned would have to prove to the Emperor’s
satisfaction that there had been no default. No new Eagle would be
granted in place of one lost until the regiment in question had atoned
for the slur on its character by either achieving “_éclatante_”
distinction in the field, by some exceptionally brilliant feat of arms,
or by presenting the Emperor with an enemy’s standard “taken by its own
valour.”

The silken tricolor flag, as has been said, was in the eyes of Napoleon
of subordinate account. It was to be considered merely as a set-off
to the Eagle, as merely “_l’ornement de l’Aigle_.” The Eagle, and the
Eagle only, must be the object of the soldier’s devotion. Napoleon
paid little regard to the flag, beyond as being of use for displaying
the record of a regiment’s war career. He would have liked indeed, as
it would seem, to substitute another flag altogether, and went so far
as to have designs for a green regimental flag submitted to him.[2]
Prudence, however, forbade its introduction, and directions were
issued that the general pattern of tricolor standard in use under the
Consulate should be retained, with minor alterations of detail in the
design rendered necessary in consequence of the new constitution of the
State.

[Sidenote: THE LEGEND ON THE FLAG]

The regimental flags would consist of a white diamond-shaped centre,
with the corners of the flag alternately red and blue; according to the
pattern authorised two years previously by Napoleon as First Consul.
Thus the national colours would continue to be represented. For the
Infantry, in the centre of each flag would be, on one side, the words
“Empire Français,” with the legend, inscribed in letters of gold,
“L’Empereur des Français au --^e Régiment d’Infanterie de Ligne,” which
would take the place of the Republican inscription hitherto borne
there; the number of each corps being inscribed in the blank space and
in a laurel chaplet embroidered at each corner of the flag. For Cavalry
the inscription ran: “L’Empereur des Français au --^e Cuirassiers,” or
“au --^e Chasseurs”; and so on for other corps, Artillery, Dragoons,
and Hussars.

On the reverse, for corps of all arms, with the exception of the Guard,
was emblazoned the motto “Valeur et Discipline,” and beneath it the
number of the battalion or squadron in each regiment.

Below the numbers was added any Inscription of Honour which had been
granted to the corps, such as, in the case of one regiment, “Le 15^e
est couvert de la Gloire”; in the case of another, “Le Terrible 57^e
qui rien n’arrête”; with others, “Le Bon et Brave 28^e”; “Le 75^e
arrive et bât l’Ennemi”; “J’étais tranquille, le brave 32^e était là”;
“Il n’est pas possible d’être plus brave que le 63^e”; “Brave 18^e, je
vous connais. L’Ennemi ne tiendra pas devant vous”; and so on. These
were mostly quotations from “mentions in despatches” made by Napoleon
in regard to regiments in his famous “Army of Italy,” authorised by
him, at first of his own initiative, and later as First Consul, to be
recorded as Inscriptions of Honour on the regimental colours. The flags
of other corps bore names of victories of note in which the regiments
had taken part; as, for instance, “Rivoli,” “Lodi,” “Marengo.”[3]

[Sidenote: PROPOSED FOR CORONATION DAY]

Napoleon overlooked nothing that might add to the prestige of his
Eagles. Not only would he himself personally present its Eagle to
each regiment, but, further, there would be at the outset a general
presentation of Eagles in Paris to the whole Army, which would be
made a State event of significance, and form an integral part of
the ceremony of his Coronation. On that Napoleon had insisted, in
reply to a technical legal objection raised at one of the meetings
of the Council of State. It was not to be a Parisian popular show.
He was ready, indeed, he said, to transfer the ceremony to Boulogne.
“Je rassemblerais deux cent mille hommes au camp. Là j’aurais une
population couverte des blessures dont je serais sûr!” He gave
directions that the Presentation of the Eagles should take place on the
Field of Mars in front of the Military School, on the same day as the
Coronation, and should follow immediately after the religious service
and his actual crowning and consecration by the Pope in Notre Dame.[4]




CHAPTER II

THE DAY OF THE PRESENTATION ON THE FIELD OF MARS


[Sidenote: THE DAY FINALLY FIXED]

The Coronation, Napoleon first proposed, should take place in the
Chapel of the Invalides, on the historic day of the 18th Brumaire
(November 9). Directly after it he would proceed in Imperial State,
wearing his crown and robes, to the Field of Mars--the Champ de Mars,
in front of the Military School, a stone’s-throw away--there to
administer the Military Oath of Allegiance to the Army and distribute
the Eagles at a grand review to be attended by representative
deputations from every regiment of the Army from all over the Empire,
assembled in Paris for the occasion. It was found preferable, however,
that the Coronation service should take place in the Cathedral of
Notre Dame instead of at the Invalides; and at a later date. Still,
however, Napoleon held to his first idea of proceeding direct from
the Coronation ceremony to the Field of Mars. He insisted that
the presentation of the Eagles should follow as a joint ceremony
immediately after his own consecration service. But there was Josephine
to be considered. She was to accompany Napoleon throughout. The
Empress, for her part, on hearing what was intended, declared herself
physically incapable of bearing the strain of the double ceremony, and,
in the result, Napoleon changed his original purpose at the eleventh
hour. He consented to put off the presentation of the Eagles until the
following morning. That plan, in turn, had to be altered. On the very
afternoon of the Coronation, on his return to the Tuileries from Notre
Dame, Napoleon found himself compelled, in consequence of the Empress’s
state of nervous prostration after the fatiguing Cathedral service,
again to defer the ceremony of the presentation of the Eagles. The
Emperor now fixed the following Wednesday, December 5, for the “_Fête
des Aigles_,” as the Army spoke of it--three days from then. There was
no further putting off after that.

The plans for the muster were drawn up on a grandiose and elaborate
scale. They provided for an immense attendance under arms of, according
to one account, eighty thousand men; to comprise the Imperial Guard,
and the garrison of Paris, together with special detachments sent to
Paris as representative deputations by every regiment and corps of
the Army, from all over the Empire. Over a thousand Eagles altogether
were to be presented: two hundred and eighty to cavalry regiments; six
hundred odd to infantry, artillery, and special corps; between forty
and fifty to the Navy (one for the crew of every ship of the Line in
commission); besides a hundred and eight to the departmental legions of
the National Guard, the constitutional militia of Revolutionary France,
which Napoleon, for reasons of policy, could not pass over. Every
infantry battalion and cavalry squadron, and brigade (or battery) of
artillery was to have its Eagle.

Each infantry deputation, from both the Imperial Guard and the Line,
would comprise the colonel or regimental commander, four other
officers, and ten sous-officiers and men from each of the three
battalions that at that period made up a French regiment of Foot. In
all, in addition to the regiments of the Imperial Guard, one hundred
and twelve regiments of the Line were to be represented, together with
thirty-one of Light Infantry, twelve of Grenadiers, and one of foreign
infantry. A deputation of fifteen officers and men was to represent
each of the hundred and odd cavalry regiments of the Guard and Line;
and smaller individual detachments would represent the various other
arms and branches of the service appointed to receive Eagles. They
would all pass before the Emperor and receive their Eagles from him
personally, on behalf of their absent comrades, the six hundred
thousand men who at that moment constituted the active field army of
France. From every French ship of the Line in commission there would
in like manner attend ten officers and men.

[Sidenote: THE WHOLE ARMY REPRESENTED]

From far and near the detachments of soldiers and sailors converged
on the capital, marching some of them hundreds of miles from the most
distant frontier garrisons of the Empire, and being several weeks on
the road. The deputations of the First Army Corps, for instance, part
of which was stationed in Hanover, set off early in October; some of
its soldiers, quartered by the Elbe, and with from four to five hundred
miles of road before them, started in the last week of September. The
detachments from Italy and the Venetian frontier, for another instance,
the deputations from the 1st of the Line, the 10th, the 52nd, and 101st
of the Verona garrison, had over eight hundred miles to go, and started
early in September. Quite an army, indeed, was on the move along the
highways of France during October and November; all heading for Paris,
marching by day and being billeted in the towns and villages by night.
A huge series of detachments came from the camp of the “Army of the
Ocean” at Boulogne assembled for the invasion of England. Marshal
Soult, the Commander-in-Chief at Boulogne, with Marshals Davout and
Ney, preceded them, Admiral Bruix, in charge of the Boulogne “Invasion
Flotilla” of gunboats and transports, accompanying Soult. The troops
in Holland; the garrisons of the Rhine fortresses, such as Mayence
and Strasburg, and of Metz; that of Bayonne on the Spanish frontier;
troops at every place of arms and cantonment and regimental dépôt all
over France--all sent their deputations; also every outlying camp,
every naval port along the coast, from the Texel and Antwerp, Brest,
Rochfort, and L’Orient round to Toulon, in the south.

Orders were given in every case that the detachments were each to bring
the existing regimental colours, which, it was understood, were to be
given up on parade in exchange for the Eagles.

A roomy expanse of level ground several acres in extent, an
oblong-shaped area nearly three-quarters of a mile in length and six
hundred yards across, the Field of Mars offered an ideal place for a
showy military spectacle. Thousands of people could look on comfortably
at the display from the turfed slopes of the twenty-feet-high
embankment which skirted the Field of Mars on three sides, and had
been fitted up by the municipality with rows of seats in closely set
tiers. As many as three hundred thousand spectators, indeed, could on
occasion be accommodated there. The fourth side of the Champ de Mars
was bounded by the _façade_ of the Ecole Militaire--three great domed
blocks of buildings connected together and affording a grand view of
the scene for hundreds of privileged guests. The entire frontage of
the Military School to the height of the first-floor windows was
taken up for the Day of the Eagles parade by an immense grand-stand,
constructed to form a series of pavilions for the accommodation of the
great official personages invited; with, in the centre, in front of the
lofty colonnaded portico, a magnificently decorated Imperial Pavilion,
whence Napoleon and Josephine seated on their thrones would look on and
receive the homage of the Army.

[Sidenote: THE WEATHER ON THAT MORNING]

The only thing that was unpropitious was the weather. It proved, as
far as the weather went, an unfortunate change of date. The day of the
Coronation, December 2--it was, by the way, Advent Sunday--had been
cold and trying, with lowering clouds overhead, but dry. On the Monday,
Napoleon’s second choice, it was much the same out of doors; and on
the Tuesday the weather kept fair. Then, however, it changed. During
Tuesday afternoon the glass began to go down ominously and a chilly
wind from the south-east set in. Towards ten at night rain and sleet in
incessant showers began to fall--typical Frimaire weather, in keeping
with the character of the “sleety month.” “When it did not rain,” says
somebody, “it snowed, and between whiles it rained and snowed at the
same time.” That was what the weather was like when Wednesday morning
broke; but in spite of it the Imperial programme was to be carried out
in its entirety, and hundreds of thousands of intending spectators
braved the discomfort and started early to get a good place for
witnessing the historic display.

All Paris turned out early, prepared to sit out the day from eight in
the morning until probably after four in the afternoon, packed in dense
masses round the Champ de Mars.

The heavy firing of salvos of artillery soon after dawn, from a dozen
points all over Paris, ushered in the day’s doings. The whole city was
already, as has been said, astir and in the streets, making its way
to the Champ de Mars. Everywhere dark columns of cloaked soldiers,
horse and foot, artillerymen without their guns, were tramping along
through the slush and mud for their posts; some to take part on the
route of the procession, which was to start from the Tuileries; most
of them bound for the Field of Mars. Along the streets to be passed by
the Imperial procession the houses were gaily decked out with festoons
and branches of evergreens, or with coloured hangings and drapings.
Oriental rugs of gorgeous hues and patterns, hired or borrowed for the
Coronation week, hung from most of the windows; they were the favourite
form of decoration. Here and there flags were seen, but it was not the
fashion in Paris at that day to fly flags largely on days of public
rejoicing.

At ten o’clock the cannon again thundered out an Imperial salute--a
hundred and one guns. All knew what that was for, and there was a hush
of expectation all over Paris. The guns meant that the Emperor had
started; that the Imperial State procession had left the Tuileries.
At that moment the chilly drizzle of sleet was still coming down, but
the universal enthusiasm rose superior to the wet and cold. No weather
could damp the anticipations of the excited Parisians over the Imperial
spectacle.

[Sidenote: MURAT COMMANDS THE PARADE]

On the Champ de Mars, as the guns began to fire, the soldiers--all long
since in their places drawn up in closely massed columns, that ranged
right round the parade ground on three sides--stripped off and rolled
up their soaked cloaks, fixed bayonets, and stood to arms. Murat,
Governor of Paris, Commander-in-Chief on the parade, took post in
front of the Imperial Pavilion before the Ecole Militaire: a gorgeous
figure in a bright blue velvet uniform coat, resplendently embroidered
with gold, a lilac sash with crimson stripes round his waist; in
scarlet breeches braided with gold, purple leather Hessians, trimmed
and tasselled with gold, with gleaming gold spurs and sabre-scabbard;
wearing a Marshal’s cocked hat with crimson ostrich-plumes, and mounted
on a no less splendidly caparisoned charger, with leopard-skin and
crimson and gold saddle-trappings. A brilliant _entourage_ of staff
officers and dandy aides de camp, daintily attired in pearl-grey
uniforms, with silver lace, or in crimson and green and gold, clustered
in rear of their chief.

Simultaneously, the massed bands of the Imperial Guard, who had been
playing national airs and popular music at times during the past hour,
formed to the front near by.

For the time being, until after the Emperor should arrive and take
his seat on the throne, the troops on parade, comprising the Army
deputations to receive the Eagles, remained as they had been marshalled
on arrival; arranged in a vast fan-shaped formation round three sides
of the Champ de Mars. The entire Imperial Army of Napoleon stood
represented within that space: Imperial Guard, and Line, Cavalry and
Artillery; the sailors of the Navy; the National Guard,--the _mise en
scène_ presenting a tremendous impression of martial power, as all
stood formed up in close order, in their full-dress review-uniforms,
muskets held stiffly at the support, bayonets fixed.

The Imperial procession set off in full State, accompanied by much the
same display of martial pomp that had attended the great Coronation
progress to Notre Dame of three days before. It moved off in a pelting
squall of sleet; but, almost immediately afterwards, as though Heaven
would fain spare the show, within a few minutes of the start, the sleet
and rain ceased and the weather unexpectedly improved.

[Sidenote: THE MAMELUKES LEAD THE WAY]

Foremost of all, the mounted Mamelukes of the Guard came prancing by,
radiant in Oriental garb, their curved scimitars drawn and gleaming;
a hundred swarthy figures in scarlet calpacks swathed round with
white turbans, garbed in vivid green burnous-cloaks well thrown back
to display gold-embroidered scarlet jackets, bright straw-coloured
sashes, and baggy scarlet trousers. Their famous Horse-tail Standard
headed the squadron. Eight hundred stalwart troopers of Napoleon’s pet
regiment, the corps whose uniform he always wore in camp, the Chasseurs
of the Guard, followed immediately after the Mamelukes. An ideal _corps
d’élite_ they looked as they rode by, in their bristling busbies of
dark fur topped with waving crimson and green plumes, dark green
double-breasted jackets, and crimson breeches; with crimson pelisses
hanging at the shoulder, fur-trimmed and barred with yellow braid in
hussar style. These two corps led the van of the procession.

The first set of Imperial coaches, with six horses each and outriders,
thereupon came by. They carried mostly State magnificos and grandees
of exalted position at Court. Coach after coach went slowly past at a
dignified pace: eight--nine--ten--eleven--conveyances, all spick and
span with new gilding and varnish. The twelfth coach, beside which
rode a bevy of smart equerries, held the Princesses of the Bonaparte
family: five grown-up ladies and the little daughter of Princess Louis.
It was rather a tight squeeze, for the five Imperial Highnesses were
plump and bulky persons, and had to be wedged closely; they brought
with them too, each lady, several yards of train, brocaded stuff with
stiff edging of gilt-gimp, and thick purple and emerald green velvet
mantling, which had all to be got in and kept from crumpling as much
as possible! What they said to one another has not been recorded--they
were usually free-spoken women with comments for most things ready to
their tongues, like other daughters of the Revolution. At any rate this
is known. They were in white silk dresses, low necked, and, in spite of
their close packing, shivered with the cold, which they felt bitterly.
“We were all,” related a Lady of Honour elsewhere in the procession,
“thinly dressed, as for a heated ball-room, and had only thin Cashmere
shawls to keep our shoulders warm with.”

Then came more soldiers. The immediate escort of the Emperor now
appeared. Sitting erect and stiff in their saddles, the Carabiniers
rode up--the senior cavalry regiment of France--eight hundred picked
horsemen uniformed in Imperial blue and crimson and gold, with helmets
of burnished brass, over which nodded thick tufted crests of crimson
wool. The officers, superb beings adorned with breastplates of gleaming
brass, led the regiment. The Carabiniers claimed to be the only corps
of the Napoleonic Army which could prove continuity with the Old Royal
Army, if not indeed with the historic “Maison du Roi” itself, the
Household Brigade of the Monarchy, owing to a curious oversight at the
Revolution through which the regiment had escaped dispersal.

Then came the Man of the Hour.

[Sidenote: THE IMPERIAL COACH APPEARS]

Napoleon now appeared, in his brand-new Imperial State coach. Eight
noble bays drew it--with harness and trappings of red morocco leather
studded with golden bees. A marvellous vehicle to look at was
Napoleon’s coach, gleaming all over with gilded carved work; its roof
topped by a great golden crown, modelled “after that of Charlemagne,”
as people told one another, upheld by four glistening gilded eagles.
The State coach sparkled all over, looking as if encrusted with
gold; a gleaming mass of carved and gilded decorations, representing
allegorical emblems, heraldic designs, and coats of arms in colour.

Napoleon’s head coachman of the Consulate days, César, sat on the box,
his fat form embedded in the centre of a luxurious hammer-cloth of
scarlet velvet, spangled over with golden bees. Outriders in green and
gold and walking footmen beside the horses added their part; also half
a score of Pages of Honour, hanging on all round at the sides and back
of the coach, in green velvet coats, gold laced down the seams, with
green silk shoulder-knots, scarlet silk breeches and stockings, and
white ostrich-plumes in their jaunty black velvet hats: most of the
lads future officers of the Guard. At either side rode Equerries and
_Officiers d’Ordonnance_, in white and gold or pale blue and silver.

To the crowds that lined the streets the State coach was a sight of the
day--the coach, for some, as much as the Emperor. All Paris, of course,
had not been able to find room round the Field of Mars, spacious as
the accommodation there was. The pavements all along the streets from
the Tuileries were packed with a dense crowd, which pressed everywhere
close up behind the double rows of Gendarmes and Imperial Guardsmen
keeping the processional route.

They shouted “Vive l’Empereur!” lustily, for all had a good view of
Napoleon through the great glass windows of the coach; seated inside
on the right, wearing his ostrich-feathered cap of semi-State, a gold
embroidered purple velvet mantle, and the Grand Master’s collar of the
Legion of Honour, sparkling with costly gems.

Josephine, a slender figure in ermine cloak and white silk dress,
sat on Napoleon’s left, and on the front seats sat Joseph and Louis,
side by side--the elder brother sleek and smiling, wrapped up in
a poppy-red cloak as Grand Elector of the Empire; Louis Bonaparte
wearing his blue velvet Constable’s mantle over the brass breastplate
of the Colonel-in-Chief of the Carabiniers, to which rank Napoleon
had specially promoted Louis, with the idea of maintaining an old
tradition of the Monarchy that the titular Commander of the Carabiniers
should always be a Prince of the Blood, “_Frère du Roi_.”

[Sidenote: CHIEFS OF THE “MAISON MILITAIRE”]

Napoleon’s Imperial Standard was borne immediately after the State
coach; a crowned eagle heading the staff; the flag a silken tricolor,
richly fringed with gold and bespangled with golden bees.

Four of the Marshals, readily recognised by their scarlet
ostrich-plumes and gold-tipped bâtons of command, attended the
Standard, and, as Colonels-General of the Imperial Guard, led the
Imperial Military Household, the “Maison Militaire de l’Empereur.”
The four were: Davout, titular chief of the Grenadiers of the
Guard; Soult, Colonel-General of the Chasseurs; Bessières, of the
Heavy Cavalry; Mortier, of the Guard Artillery. Close behind them
four other gorgeously brilliant officers of rank rode abreast,
the Colonels-General of the Cavalry of the Army: St. Cyr, of the
Cuirassiers, disdainful and sardonic of mien; stern Baraguay
d’Hilliers, of the Dragoons; good-looking Junot, Colonel-General of the
Hussars; and Napoleon’s son-in-law, the chivalrous Eugène Beauharnais,
Colonel-General of Chasseurs. A brilliant cavalcade of little less
resplendent cavaliers, the Emperor’s aides de camp, all of them
Generals of Division or Brigadiers, rounded up the group.

Another eye-surfeit of gleaming varnish, gilded carvings, and green
liveries continued the pageant: twelve other State coaches, six-horsed
like those in advance; carrying the personal suites of Napoleon
and Josephine and the Princesses, Court Chamberlains and similar
gold-embroidered functionaries, Ladies of the Palace and “Officers of
the Crown.” The procession ended after them; the rear being brought
up by the Mounted Grenadiers of the Guard, strapping troopers in
huge bear-skins--soldiers picked for their height and bearing from
the Cavalry of the Line--and the Gendarmerie d’Elite, who formed the
Imperial palace-guard.

More than half the Imperial Guard--numbering, in 1804, ten thousand
officers and men--lined the streets under arms; detachments of
Grenadiers and Vélites, Foot-Chasseurs, Veterans of the Guard, Marines
of the Guard. Through double rows of these, all standing with presented
arms, the procession took its way, passing from the Tuileries Gardens,
across the Place de Concorde and over the bridge there, to the
Esplanade des Invalides. Yet another thundering Imperial salute from
the twenty old cannons of the Batterie Triomphale greeted Napoleon at
that point; while rows of old soldiers, the maimed veterans of Arcola
and Rivoli and Marengo, shouted themselves hoarse, standing ranged in
front of the Outer Court beside Napoleon’s Venetian trophy, kept there
temporarily, the Lion of St. Mark.

From the Invalides, by way of the Rue de Grenelle, it was not far to
the Military School.

[Sidenote: WITHIN THE MILITARY SCHOOL]

Withindoors at the Ecole Militaire a pause was made in the Governor’s
apartments, which had been sumptuously furnished for the occasion from
the Imperial storerooms of the _Garde Meuble_. Napoleon here accepted a
number of selected addresses from the military delegations. One of them
was brought by the regimental deputation of the 4th Chasseurs stationed
at Boulogne. It thanked the Emperor in advance for the new standard he
was presenting to the corps, “trusting that the day is at hand when we
shall be able to contribute towards consolidating the splendour of the
Empire by planting our Eagle on the Tower of London.” The Emperor also
received the congratulations of the Ambassadors and Diplomatic Corps.
Ten hereditary German Princes of the Rhineland, visiting Paris for the
Coronation, attended at the Military School to witness the Presentation
of the Eagles; at their head the Prince-Bishop-Elector of Ratisbon,
Arch-Chancellor of the German Empire, the Margrave of Baden, and the
Princes of Hesse-Darmstadt and Hesse-Homburg. Napoleon and Josephine
after that withdrew to assume their crowns and Imperial regalia and
pass outside to the two thrones prepared for them and standing side by
side in the grand central pavilion in front.

The vast array of “guests of the Emperor,” seated outside, had of
course been long since in their places, awaiting the advent of their
Majesties amid surroundings designed on a scale of lavish magnificence
regardless of cost.

On either hand pavilions and galleries and platforms, canopied and
carpeted, draped and curtained and hung in crimson and gold, decorated
with festoons and banners, and fenced with gilded balustrading, covered
the whole length of the _façade_ of the Ecole Militaire fronting the
parade ground. In the centre stood the Imperial Pavilion, beneath
a canopy of crimson silk supported by tall gilded columns. Side
galleries draped, and under awnings led from it right and left to two
other pavilions, at either end of the _façade_, similarly adorned in
lavish gorgeousness. Below the galleries extended long stands, sloping
forward to the ground, draped in green and crimson, and packed with
rows of seats five or six deep. Here, partly in the open, sat the
provincial Coronation guests from the Departments: the local prefects
and sub-prefects, procurators, magistrates and syndics, mayors and
councillors, and other municipal functionaries, all in gala-day attire
of every colour, plumes in their hats, and buttons and embroidery all
over their coats. They made a many-hued show in the mass, seen from
the parade ground. The higher State dignitaries had seats under the
canopies of the galleries, and looked yet more decorative. Seated in
the pavilions on cushioned chairs were the Ambassadors and Foreign
Princes, the Senate, Corps Legislatif, and Tribunate, High Court
Judges in flowing robes of flame-coloured silk, and velvet-clad “Grand
Officers of the Empire,” in full-dress all. They looked imposing and
magnificent, but most of them were shivering, with damp bodies and
numbed fingers.

[Sidenote: IN THE IMPERIAL PAVILION]

The sleet had stopped for the time, but after the all-night’s downpour
of rain and snow the seats everywhere were in a sad condition. Canopies
and cushions, curtains, seats, carpets--everything had been drenched
through and swamped during the night. The discomfort, however, was past
helping and had to be borne. The Imperial Pavilion itself indeed had
not escaped a wetting, and in parts it was in little better condition
than the other places. “Only with the greatest diligence,” describes
one of the suite, “had it been possible to keep the thrones dry.”

Napoleon’s throne, with beside it the throne for Josephine, at a
slightly lower elevation, stood at the front of the Imperial Pavilion.
A gilt-framed crimson velvet Chair of State was provided for the
Emperor, with a crowned eagle in gilt stucco perched on the back; made
on the model of Dagobert’s chair on which Napoleon had sat during the
ceremony of the distribution of the Crosses of the Legion of Honour at
Boulogne. As on that day, so now, trophies of captured battle-flags
adorned the back of the Imperial daïs, selected from the two hundred
and odd standards taken in battle by the Armies of Italy and Egypt
which Napoleon had led in person: trophies of Montenotte and Arcola,
of Tagliamento and Lodi, of Rivoli and Castiglione; the red-and-white
banner of the Knights of Malta; the green Horse-tail Standard of the
Beys of Egypt; Austrian standards won by Napoleon at the crowning
triumph of Marengo.

To right and left of the Emperor, on richly decorated chairs of
ceremony, Joseph and Louis Bonaparte and the Princesses were seated.
The Imperial suites in attendance were grouped at the back together
with a cluster of court grandees, filling most of the spacious platform
behind the throne.

In the forefront, at the Emperor’s right hand, stood a splendid galaxy
of stalwart figures--the Marshals of the Empire. They stood forward
prominently. For them that was the day of days. All must see on such
a day the champion warriors of France, the renown of whose victories
had filled the world! The whole eighteen were there--all except one.
Marshal Brune alone was absent; on service out of France as Napoleon’s
Ambassador at Constantinople. The group was completed by the four
“Honorary Marshals”--the veteran Kellermann, the victor of Valmy;
Perignon; Serrurier; and Lefebvre.

[Sidenote: THE LIEUTENANTS OF THE WAR LORD]

Glance for one moment round the main group of thirteen, the chosen
lieutenants of Napoleon the War Lord, as they stand beside their Chief,
with, arrayed in front, the serried columns of the destined victors of
Austerlitz. Next to the Emperor and the Eagles it is they who on this
Day of the Eagles are the principal objects of interest to the general
spectator.

Let the reader for one moment imagine himself on the Imperial Pavilion,
with at his side a convenient friend who knows everybody, to point the
marshals out.

That short, spare, low-browed, swarthy, Italian-faced man, with crafty,
pitiless eyes, is Masséna--“L’Enfant chéri de la Victoire,” as Napoleon
himself hailed him on the battlefield; the very ablest undoubtedly of
all the Marshals. He knows it too. When the list of the Marshals first
came out, a friend called on Masséna to know if it was true that he
was one, and to congratulate him. “Oh yes, thank you,” replied Masséna
in an icy tone, puckering up his dark face with a sour look, “I am
one; _one of fourteen_!” He’s Italian in blood and breeding, and in
his tricky ways; every point about him: but he’d give his soul to be a
Frenchman! “Massène” is what he is always trying to get people to call
him. And the airs and self-importance he assumes--though only like most
of the others in that, indeed--ever since he became “Monseigneur le
Maréchal” and has had the honour of being addressed as “Mon Cousin”
by the Emperor! Just think of it! In the old days, behind the counter
of that little olive-oil and dried-fruit shop up a narrow, smelly back
street at Antibes, plain “Citoyen André” was good enough! Just look at
that thin, pouting chest, gleaming all over with gold embroidery, with
the broad crimson riband of the Legion of Honour slanting across it,
and the aggressive tilt of his ostrich-plumed hat! Imagine all that
being once upon a time just a cabin-boy on a Marseilles to Leghorn
coaster, half-starved and sworn at and cuffed and kicked about by a
curmudgeonly _padrone_! Then fancy it a sneaking smuggler, chevied
about, and crouching along to keep out of carbine shot of the Nice
_douaniers_! After that Sergeant Masséna of the late King’s _Royal
Italien_ regiment of the Line! And so to the bâton.

They are most of them rather _tête montée_ just now, with their
exaltation spick and span on them, these demi-gods of war of ours! Just
see them in the field, or on the march; away from the Emperor. They
stalk ahead in solitary grandeur; each with his own _pas seul_, keeping
the lesser creation at arms’ length, wrapped up in his own dignified
importance. Yet only six months since their lofty Excellencies were
mere generals of division, “Citoyen Général” this or that, each one;
just units among a hundred and twenty odd others! Nowadays, on the
march, your Marshal rides by himself, forty yards ahead of everybody;
his staff have to tail off well in rear and keep back! M. le Maréchal
doesn’t deign to open his lips, except to give an order. He lives by
himself: nobody now is good enough to ask to dinner, except perhaps
another marshal! No off-duty pleasantries nowadays; no more _bon
camaraderie_; no more telling of Palais-Royal stories, as it used
to be; no more cracking of jokes beside the bivouac fire. You might
as well expect a bishop to have a game of marbles! Let a former
brother-officer _tutoyer_ a marshal! Poor fellow! Let him try, if he
wants to know what a paralysing, rasping, cold-blooded snub is, to get
a flattening backhander he’ll remember as long as he wears the uniform.

[Sidenote: TWO FAMOUS HARD FIGHTERS]

That tall, bull-necked, heavy-featured man is Augereau; “gros comme
un tambour-major”; absolutely fearless under fire, kind-hearted to
those he takes a fancy to, they say, but ordinarily a coarse-tongued
swashbuckler, with barrack-room manners. There too is Lannes, that
keen-eyed, short man, holding his head as if he had a crick in his
neck! He has one, a permanent one, the result of a bullet under the jaw
from a British marine’s musket in the trenches at Acre. A hot-tempered,
fiery, devil-may-care fellow is Lannes; but as cold as ice on the
battlefield when things look like going wrong! Among friends,
chivalrous and generous-hearted to a degree, his men worship Lannes;
“the Roland of the Grand Army,” some call him. That is Moncey: and that
very tall and erect, dry, rather dense-looking, hawk-nosed marshal with
the shaggy eyebrows, Mortier. Mark Bernadotte there, that shifty-eyed
Gascon with a sharp nose and thick hair; of medium height,--nobody
really trusts him. An ingrained Jacobin--strip his arm and you will
find tattooed on it, indelibly, for life, “Mort aux rois”--and a
schemer, Napoleon named him a Marshal for political reasons mainly;
although, no doubt, he has the same soldier-qualifications as the
rest; has won a pitched battle or taken two fortresses. A cunning,
plausible fellow is Bernadotte; with ready smile and a smooth tongue.
He calls everybody “Mon ami” whether he is talking to a brigadier or
a bugler. “Que diable fait il dans cette galère?” say a good many
people of the Commander of the First Army Corps. Over yonder stands
Bessières, Murat’s great friend; a gentlemanly enough fellow, but at
times thick-headed, hardly of the mental calibre of his confrères. Yet
Bessières is an ideal leader of Horse on the battlefield; as reckless
as a lion at bay: you should see him head a charge sword in hand! One
of Napoleon’s pets is he and the only man in the Army who sticks to his
queue. Bessières flatly refused to cut it off when the order was given
last June for everybody to copy “Le petit tondu” (“The little shorn
one”), as the men call the Emperor, and it hangs halfway down his back.

That dark, sleek-faced, heavy-eyed man is Jourdan, Commander-in-Chief
once of the Army of the Revolution. “The Anvil,” some call him, he has
been so often soundly beaten. But, all the same, he was too popular
with the Army for Napoleon to pass him over. Jourdan it was who
invented the conscription system. He started in life as a linen-draper
at Grenoble. There is of course, too, Brune, who isn’t here to-day: but
he doesn’t count for much. A minor-poet and a journalist was he once
upon a time. He’s another of the clever-tongued Jacobins the Emperor
gave the bâton to as a sop.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON’S RIGHT-HAND MAN]

Look near the Emperor, at that neat athletic figure, of middle height:
that is “Old Berthier.” He is from ten to fifteen years older than most
of the other marshals; or, in fact, than the Emperor himself. Berthier,
in fact, is old enough to have been a captain in the Army of the
_ancien régime_, and can remember how he first smelt powder fighting
under Lafayette and Washington against the British in America. He was a
staff officer when Napoleon first came to the Ecole Militaire here from
Brienne, as a boy gentleman-cadet. A heaven-born Chief of the Staff is
Marshal Berthier, and the Emperor without him in a campaign would be
like a man without his right hand. Every detail goes like clockwork
with Berthier at the head of the Etat-Major.

You should see the two of them on campaign, working together in the
Quartier-Général. Napoleon will be sprawling on his stomach at full
length over a huge set of maps which cover, spread out, nearly the
whole floor of the tent; an open pair of compasses in his hand, a box
of pins with little paper flag-heads, red, blue, yellow, green, at one
side, some of them already stuck over the map marking the positions
of the different corps and of the enemy. He has the compasses set to
scale, to mark off some seventeen to twenty miles, which means from
twenty-two to twenty-five miles of road, taking into account the
windings. To and fro he twists and turns the compasses like lightning
and decides in an instant the marches for each column to arrive at
the desired point, all timed exactly to the very day and hour with an
astonishing certainty and precision. He calls out his instructions
in half a dozen words or so, sharply snapped out, for Berthier, who
all the time is standing near, bending down at Napoleon’s shoulder,
notebook and pencil in hand, to take down. Old Berthier has a veritable
instinct for understanding what the Emperor means. He can interpret the
smallest grunt Napoleon makes. He can spin out three or four broken
ejaculations into detailed orders for an Army Corps, all worked out
with absolute clearness, in beautiful language. It is amazing how he
does it, but he does do it. A staff officer, or else Bacler d’Albe, the
Imperial Military Cartographer, the officer in charge of the maps, it
may be, is all the while also kneeling by the pin-box, and has the pins
of the right colour out and stuck in the maps as fast as the Emperor
wants them. The instant the Emperor is satisfied, Berthier is off, and
with the secretaries at work in his own quarters drafting the orders.
Then, before you know well where you are, a dozen _estafettes_ are
galloping all over the country with the orders--in the case of a very
important order sometimes three or four staff officers each take a
copy, to ride by different routes so as to minimise the risk of delay
or capture. That is the working of Berthier’s system, and there is not
often a miscarriage or serious hitch in the delivery.

[Sidenote: MARSHALL SOULT]

And mark Soult, the coming man of the Marshals when he gets his chance;
a wary old dog-fox for an enemy to tackle. A sergeant of infantry in
the old “Royal Regiment” of former days, the old 13th of the Line, then
a drill-instructor of Volunteers, now he is at the head of the Army
at Boulogne for the descent on England. Hardly even the Emperor knows
more about tactics than Soult. Note how self-possessed and masterful
he looks, so cold and impassive of demeanour. Those eyes that seem to
pierce through you, those clear-cut aquiline features, that face like
a mask of bronze, show the character of the man. You wouldn’t think
though, to see his fine soldier-like figure as he stands there, a
warrior born to look at, that Soult is not only lame from a fall from
his horse years ago, but has limped from his birth, from a club-foot.

That bald-headed marshal over there is Marshal Davout, a dashing
subaltern of Dragoons once in the Old Royal Army. A fine tactician
for a hot place is Davout; and when the fight has been won, no leader
so harsh and pitiless to the vanquished enemy. He wears spectacles on
service: he can hardly see ten yards in front of his big nose. The
ladies are very fond of Davout; he waltzes so nicely.

And that other there is Marshal Ney; “the Indefatigable” is the
Army’s name for him. He never spares himself, nor the enemy, on the
battlefield; but after the last shot there is no more generous victor
than Marshal Ney. For sheer dogged pluck against odds, for simply
marvellous intrepidity, the world cannot match Ney. Stalwart and
square-shouldered, he carries himself with all the jaunty assurance of
manner you would expect in perhaps the most dashing leader of hussars
the Army of France has known. He is an Alsatian, born by the Rhine; a
pleasant-faced man, with frank grey eyes, curly red hair over a broad
open forehead. “Red Michael” is one of the soldiers’ names for Ney; and
there is not one of the Marshals for whom his men would do more.

[Sidenote: THE EAGLES AWAIT NAPOLEON]

Such, if it may be permitted to describe them in this way, is something
of what the Marshals of Napoleon looked like on the day of the Eagle
presentation on the Field of Mars. All eyes were turned on the Marshals
as they stood there beside Napoleon; a brilliant array of soldierly
figures in their red ostrich-plumed cocked hats, richly laced uniforms,
gleaming brass-bound sword-scabbards and high jack-boots with clanking
brass spurs.

From the foot of the throne a grand staircase led down to the parade
ground, widening out with a curving sweep to either side at the foot.
It terminated there with, flanking the lower steps, two gilded statues,
designed to represent, the one, “France granting Peace,” the other,
“France making War.” From top to bottom of the stairs and extending
at the foot to right and left along either side, stood in rows the
colonels of the regiments on parade, together with the senior officers
of the National Guard, all awaiting the Emperor’s appearance on the
throne. Each bore the new Eagle standard to be presented to his own
corps. All were at their posts as the appointed moment neared, while at
the same time Murat and his attendant cavalcade of brilliantly bedecked
horsemen closed in and formed up in front, so as immediately to face
Napoleon.

On either hand of Murat were ranked the massed bands of the Imperial
Guard, flanked by two solid phalanxes of drummers, each a thousand
strong. Near by these were drawn up on horseback, on one side the
officers of the Head Quarters Staff at the War Office, on the other,
the staff officers of the army corps of the Marshals.

Napoleon and Josephine made their entry into the Grand Pavilion
heralded by a procession, the bands of the Guard playing the Coronation
March. Then, to the accompaniment of three successive shouts of “Vive
l’Empereur!” from the soldiers--the formal greeting to Napoleon
on parade, in accordance with Army regulation--the Emperor seated
himself on the throne. He was in full Imperial garb, wearing his
Imperial mantle of rich crimson velvet studded with golden bees, and
the Imperial crown, a golden laurel chaplet “after Charlemagne.” In
his right hand he bore the Imperial sceptre, a tall silver-gilt wand
with an eagle surmounting it, also designed, as they said, “after
Charlemagne.”

Seating himself with Josephine at his side, in her State robes and with
a magnificent crown of diamonds on her head, Napoleon gave the order
for the proceedings to begin.

Murat, as Governor of Paris, in immediate command of the parade, raised
his glittering marshal’s bâton. The bands of the Guard ceased playing
abruptly. The next moment the two thousand infantry drums began to
beat. It was the appointed signal for the detachments to advance and
form up in front of the throne.

At once, at the first roll of the drums, the soldiers ranged round the
ground began to move.

Wheeling some, counter-marching others, here rapidly doubling, there
marking time--looking, indeed, for the moment, at first, in the mass,
to the untrained eye of the non-military spectator like a swarming
ant-heap in motion and inextricably intermingled--like magic all
suddenly appeared in order, a series of columns, the heads of which,
arrayed at regular intervals, were in unison converging concentrically
towards the foot of the grand staircase in front of the throne. A dozen
paces in rear of where Murat stood all halted as one man. There was a
quick movement of bayonets as arms were shouldered; the action making a
glint of flashing steel in spite of the dull grey light overhead.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON FACES THE PARADE]

Every sound was hushed as Napoleon rose to his feet. He faced the
wide-spreading multitude and gazed silently over them for a moment;
standing well forward where all might see him. Then he addressed the
parade in strong vibrant tones which rang out clear and resonant over
the whole assembly like a trumpet-note. In words that seemed to thrill
with intensified energy he called on the soldiers before him, on
behalf of themselves and their absent comrades, to take the oath of
devotion to the Eagles.

“Soldiers!” he began, his right arm outstretched with an impassioned
gesture towards the Eagles, whose bearers held them stiffly erect, all
glancing and gleaming like polished gold, the bright-hued silken flags
unfurled, “behold your standards! These Eagles to you shall ever be
your rallying-point. Wherever your Emperor shall deem it needful for
the defence of his throne and his people, there shall they be seen!”

He paused. Then raising his right hand in the air with a swift
strenuous movement Napoleon pronounced the oath:

“You swear to sacrifice your lives in their defence: to maintain them
by your courage ever in the path of Victory! You swear it?”

The vast gathering stood as though spellbound. For one instant all
remained motionless and silent, held down as it were by overmastering
emotion.

Then, all together, with one accord, the soldiers found their voices.
With a thundering shout that seemed to shake the air, the Army made its
response, answering back in one deep chorus:

[Sidenote: “WE SWEAR IT! WE SWEAR IT!”]

“_Nous le jurons!_”--“We swear it!”

One and all enthusiastically re-echoed the words; while the colonels
excitedly brandished and waved aloft the Eagles. In a frenzy of martial
ardour the entire assembly, at the top of their voices, again and
again declaimed, “We swear it! We swear it!” A wild prolonged outburst
of cheering followed, and exuberant shouts of “Vive l’Empereur!”

Before the cheering had abated, the drums broke in again. The sharp
clash and rattle recalled all to order instantly. Again a dead silence
fell over the great host, standing now with recovered arms.

Up once more went Murat’s marshal’s bâton. The next moment the
dense-set columns were standing stock-still like rows of statues, with
arms at the shoulder.

Napoleon resumed his seat on the throne, and as he did so yet once more
a wave of enthusiasm swept over the vast array. Redoubled shouts of
“Vive l’Empereur!” burst wildly forth, the soldiers pulling off their
hats or helmets, and hoisting them on the points of their bayonets,
excitedly waving them, while they shouted themselves breathless.

Again the drums rolled, and again order was restored. And now the
supreme act of the drama opened--the formal presentation of each Eagle
to its own regimental deputation.

Forthwith the wide-fronted columns, breaking swiftly into
quarter-column formation, began to move, section by section, in turn.
Rapidly, and, as it almost seemed, automatically, they resumed their
first formation, extending round the Field of Mars on three sides.
From front to rear the quarter-columns took up a full mile and
three-quarters. Ranked in close order, the long-drawn-out array of
troops on that set off, to a stately march from the bands of the Guard,
to pass along the front of the Military School, before the flanking
pavilion, and galleries and stands. So, in due course, all in turn came
opposite to the foot of the great stairway ascending to the throne.

Each section, as it came in front of the steps, made a pause. The
Colonels at the same moment were passing in file before Napoleon. Each
in turn inclined the Eagle that he bore towards the Emperor. He held
the staff at an angle of forty-five degrees--the regulation method of
salute, in accordance with an Imperial order issued in the previous
July, when the adoption of the Eagle as the Army standard was first
announced. Napoleon on his side, with his ungloved right hand, just
touched each Eagle. The Colonels, then, saluting, turned, one after
the other, to descend the stairs. At the foot of the stairway each
delivered over the Eagle to the standard-bearer of his regiment, who,
together with the deputation, was at the spot to receive it.[5]

[Sidenote: THE ONLY EXISTING NAVAL EAGLE]

With the Eagles in their charge the regimental parties moved on.
Passing in front of the stands and pavilions beyond, all wheeled
there, to pass again round the arena of the Field of Mars, until they
had reached their former stations, and halted, all ranged in the order
in which they had taken post at their first arrival.

[Sidenote: THE EAGLE OF THE IRISH LEGION]

There remained after that the grand _finale_. The March Past of
the Eagle detachments before Napoleon now came on, designed as the
consummation of the day’s doings.

In connection with that, however, there was an unfortunate incident.
On the Field of Mars were displayed also the old Army colours of the
Consulate, which, as has been said, had been brought to Paris at the
order of the War Minister by the regimental deputations. Paraded
together with the new Eagles they helped to render the scene the more
striking; but their presence led to an unforeseen complication, and in
the end a deplorable _contretemps_.

The standard-bearers who had received the Eagles were each, in
addition, still carrying the old regimental flag. They had to
carry both. No instructions had been given out--by oversight, most
probably--as to the giving up of the old flags, or what was to be done
with them.

[Sidenote: ALL DID NOT WANT THE EAGLES]

It may have been that Napoleon desired that the standards of the
Consulate and the Eagles of the Empire should be displayed together
on that day. None knew better than he the deep attachment of the
older men in the ranks for their former battle-flags. Some of the old
soldiers, indeed, even there on the Field of Mars, as we are told, were
unable to restrain their feelings at the idea of having to part that
day from their old colours. “More than one tear was shed,” relates an
officer, “amidst all the cheering and shouts of ‘Vive l’Empereur!’”
Enthusiastically as most of the soldiers might welcome the new Eagles
in the presence of the Emperor, all did not desire to part with
colours which had led through the battle-smoke on many a victorious
field of the past, even in exchange for the glittering “Cou-cous,” as
barrack-room slang had already dubbed Napoleon’s Eagles, giving them in
advance a soldier’s nickname that stuck to them as long as the Army of
the Empire lasted.

Both sets of standards were carried in the march past, which proceeded
without incident to a certain point.

It was an effective display of the lusty manhood of France, of the
pick of the Grand Army in its prime; not yet made _chair au canon_
to gratify the ambition of one man. A curious commingling, too, of
fighting costumes did the review present for the general spectators;
those of yesterday side by side with those of the coming time.
Three-fourths of the soldiers went by wearing the stiff Republican
garb of the expiring _régime_, as adopted hastily at the outset of
the Revolution: the long-skirted coat, cut after the old Royal Army
fashion, but blue in colour instead of white, and with white lapels
and turn-backs; long-flapped white waistcoats, white breeches, and
high black-cloth gaiters above the knee, such as their ancestors
had worn in the days of Marshal Saxe; the old-style big cocked hat,
worn cross-wise, or “en bataille,” as the soldiers called it, with
a flaunting tricolor cockade in front. The new Napoleonic style was
represented by the Imperial Guard and Oudinot’s Grenadier Division from
Arras and the Light Infantry battalions, whose turn out in smartly cut
coatees faced with red and green, with the tall broad-topped shakos
pictures of the time make us familiar with as the normal presentment of
the soldiers of the Empire, attracted special attention.[6]

During the March Past, Frimaire suddenly reasserted itself, and brought
about the regrettable incident that was to wind up the day.

The parade was three parts through, when, all of a sudden, a tremendous
downpour of cold rain set in, discomfiting and scattering all who
were looking on. With the drenching effect of a shower-bath the rain
commenced to pour down in torrents, causing an immediate stampede
among the general public. The rearmost columns of the soldiers had to
pass before empty benches, tramping along stolidly through the mud,
“splashing ankle-deep through a sea of mud,” as an officer put it.

[Sidenote: THE SPECTATORS DISAPPEAR]

The spectators one and all disappeared. The immense crowd of sightseers
left the benches on the embankment round the Champ de Mars, and fled
home _en masse_. The seat-holders on the open stands in front of the
Ecole Militaire scurried off in like manner. The occupants of the
pavilions and galleries, half drowned by the water that streamed down
on them through the awnings, quitted their places in haste to seek
shelter within the building. The downpour saturated the canopy of the
Imperial Pavilion and dripped through. It compelled Josephine to get up
from her throne and hurry indoors. The Princesses promptly followed the
Empress’s example, all except one--Napoleon’s youngest sister, Caroline
Murat. Caroline sat the March Past out to the end, together, of course,
with Napoleon himself and the Marshals, and those Court officials who
had to stay where they were. Soaked through, she smilingly remarked
that she was “accustoming herself to endure the inconveniences
inseparable from a throne!”

Then, at the close of the review, came the _contretemps_.

After the last Eagle had gone past the throne, when Napoleon had left
on his way back to the Tuileries, as the troops were moving off the
ground to return to their quarters, unanticipated trouble suddenly
arose in connection with the old flags. What happened may best,
perhaps, be described in the words of an eye-witness, a General present
on the Field of Mars, Baron Thiébault:

“Immediately after the Emperor had gone and the seats all round
were empty, finding it tiresome to be loaded with the double set
of standards, all the more so, no doubt, as it was raining, the
standard-bearers apparently could think of nothing better than to rid
themselves of the superseded flags. They began everywhere to throw them
down, that is, to drop them where they stood in the mud. There they
were trampled under foot by the soldiers as they passed along on their
way back to quarters.”

The outrage scandalised the older soldiers, and very nearly brought
about a mutiny among some of them.

“Indignant,” to continue in General Thiébault’s words, “at such an
outrage to national emblems which the Army had been honouring and
defending for thirteen years past, many of the men in the regiments
began to grumble and make angry protestations. Presently oaths and
violent imprecations burst out on all sides; and then some of the
grenadiers became mutinous and defiant. They declared that they
would go back, regardless of the consequences, and forcibly recover
possession of the old colours.”

[Sidenote: THE SITUATION JUST SAVED]

The situation speedily became so threatening that General Thiébault
hastened off to warn Murat of what was happening. As he went he came
across one of the adjutants of the Commandant of the Military School.
On the spur of the moment he gave him orders to get together what men
he could of the party who had been keeping the parade ground. Of these
Thiébault took personal charge and sent them round at once to collect
the thrown-down colours and carry them inside the Ecole Militaire.

Apparently that satisfied the soldiers--anxious, most of them, to get
out of the wet as soon as possible.

General Thiébault tried after that to find Murat, intending to report
to him; but Murat had by then left the Field of Mars. In the end the
General decided, as perhaps the wisest course, to refrain from saying
anything; not to take official notice of what had happened. After all
he was not on duty at the parade; he was only in Paris as an invited
guest at the Coronation festivities. Nobody, as a fact, said a word
of the affair. By the authorities all reference to it seems purposely
to have been hushed up. Not a hint of anything of the sort appeared
in the _Moniteur_, which published a fairly full report of the day’s
proceedings; not a word in any of the other Parisian papers.

For the soldiers a dinner of double rations at the Emperor’s expense
wound up the Day of the Eagles; for the great personages there was
“a banquet at the Tuileries, at which the Pope and the Emperor sat
side by side at the same table, arrayed in their Pontifical and
Imperial insignia and waited upon by the Grand Officers of the Crown.”
Afterwards, without delaying in the capital, the deputations set off
on their return to rejoin their regiments. Their arrival at their
various destinations was celebrated everywhere, by Imperial order, by
a full-dress parade and State reception of the Eagle by each corps;
the occasion being further treated as a fête-day and opportunity for a
general carousal in camp or garrison. At Boulogne the regiments of the
“Army of England” took over their Eagles at a grand review on December
23, Marshal Soult presiding over the ceremony.

[Sidenote: THE CLOSE OF THE DAY]

The old standards of the Consulate, some bearing on them the
battle-scars of Marengo and Hohenlinden, remained where General
Thiébault’s assistants had left them stacked, leaning up against the
wall in one of the corridors of the Military School, until they were
carted off in artillery tumbrils to the central dépôt at Vincennes.
There, on New Year’s Day of 1805, they were officially made away with;
burned to ashes in the presence of an ordnance department official told
off to certify to their complete destruction. That was the authorised
method in France of disposing of the standards of a discredited
_régime_; but all the same it was a hard fate for national emblems that
had waved victoriously over so many a hard-fought field.

Such were the principal scenes and incidents of the Day of the Field of
Mars when Napoleon presented the Eagles of the Empire to the Soldiers
of the Grand Army.




CHAPTER III

IN THE FIRST CAMPAIGN:--


UNDER FIRE WITH MARSHAL NEY

The Eagles made their _début_ on the battlefield amid a blaze of glory.
Within a twelvemonth of the Field of Mars they had swooped irresistibly
across half the Continent, leading forward victoriously through the
cannon-smoke in combat after combat, to achieve the crowning triumphs
of Ulm and Austerlitz. Within the twelvemonth they witnessed the
overwhelming defeat of more than 200,000 foes, the capture of 500
cannon, while 120 standards had been paraded before them as spoils of
victory.

In the first fortnight of September 1805, Austria and Russia, as the
protagonists in Pitt’s great European Coalition against Napoleon,
declared war on France, and an army of 80,000 Austrians traversed
Bavaria in hot haste, to take post at Ulm by the Danube, on the
frontiers of Würtemberg. There they proposed to hold Napoleon in check,
until their Russian allies, whose advance by forced marches through
Poland had already begun, could join hands with them. After that they
would press forward in resistless force to cross the Rhine and invade
France.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON’S OPENING MOVE]

But Napoleon was beforehand with them from the outset. Within
twenty-four hours of the ultimatum reaching his hands he had made the
opening move in the campaign: the lion, whose skin had been sold, had
crouched for the fatal spring.

General Mack, the Austrian Commander-in-chief, entered Bavaria on
September 8. On September 1 Napoleon’s “Army of the Ocean” had struck
its tents in Boulogne camp and started on its way, with plans laid that
ensured Mack’s overthrow. A hundred and eighty thousand soldiers were
hastening along every high-road through Hanover, Holland, and Flanders,
and in eastern France, towards the great plain of central Bavaria, to
deal the Austrians the heaviest and most resounding blow ever yet dealt
to a modern army.

Napoleon, screening his movement by means of Murat’s cavalry, sent
ahead on a wide front to occupy the attention of the Austrian outposts,
made a bold sweep right round Mack’s right flank. Before the Austrian
general had any suspicion that there was a single Frenchman on that
side of him, the entire French army had passed the Danube in his rear,
and had blocked the great highway from Vienna. Napoleon at the first
move had cut the Austrian line of communication with their base. He
had barred the only route by which the Russians could approach to
Mack’s assistance.

That done, swiftly and successfully, while Mack, startled and utterly
staggered at the sudden appearance of the enemy in his rear, was
hurriedly facing about in confusion, to try to hold his ground,
Napoleon struck at him hard. He hurled attack after attack in force
on the Austrian flanking divisions, on both wings of Mack’s army, and
broke them up. Taking thousands of prisoners and many guns, he drove
the wreck, a disorganised mass of scared and helpless battalions,
in rout to the walls of Ulm itself. Penned in there, ringed round
by 100,000 French bayonets, with the French artillery pouring shot
and shell into the doomed fortress from commanding heights within
short range, General Mack, left now with barely 30,000 men, after a
despairing interview with Napoleon, was terrorised into immediate
surrender at discretion.

Amid such scenes did the Eagles of the Field of Mars undergo their
baptism of fire. Ever in the forefront under fire, brilliantly, time
and again, did those who bore them do their duty.

It was round the Eagles of Marshal Ney’s corps, “the Fighting Sixth,”
that the fiercest contests of the campaign centred; and on every
occasion they gained honour.

In the sharp brush at the bridge across the Danube at Reisenburg, near
the small town of Günsburg, on October 8, one of the opening encounters
of the campaign, the Eagle of the 59th of the Line showed the way to
victory. The Austrians, whom Ney surprised on the south side or right
bank, retreating as the French approached, had partially broken down
the bridge before Ney’s men could reach the place.

[Sidenote: AT THE BRIDGE OF GÜNSBURG]

The Danube flows wide and deep at Reisenburg, and there was no other
means of getting over.

Ney had explicit orders from Napoleon to cross over and occupy
Günsburg, and to hold the river passage. As the 59th, who led the
attack, got to the bridge, a long and narrow wooden structure, the
Austrian sappers were hard at work destroying it; covered by a
rearguard brigade of infantry and artillery. The planking had been
ripped away, but most of the bridge framework and supporting beams
still stood. The 59th came up and opened fire, compelling the sappers
to withdraw. Then a hasty effort was made by the pioneers of the
regiment under fire to repair part of the bridge. They made a way
across with planks wide enough for a few men to scramble over together.
“In places only one man could get across at a time.”

At once the 59th rushed forward cheering, but the concentrated Austrian
fire from the other side was too hot to face. They were beaten back
three times, the dead and wounded falling into the rushing stream
below. But were they not the 59th? No other of the regiments following
them in rear should have the honour of being the first to make the
passage! The Eagle-bearer of the 59th, weaving the Eagle aloft,
headed a fourth attack; with Colonel Gerard Lacuée, the colonel of
the regiment, a distinguished officer and an Honorary A.D.C. to the
Emperor, beside him. The two led out in front, regardless of the storm
of bullets round them. Colonel Lacuée fell mortally wounded. An officer
ran forward and carried the Colonel back to die on the river-bank, but
the Eagle-bearer went on. “Soldiers,” the brave fellow stopped for an
instant to turn round and shout back to his comrades, “your Eagle goes
forward! I shall carry it across alone!” The men of the 59th, thrown
into a frenzy at the sight of their Eagle’s peril, rallied instantly to
follow. The four leading companies held on bravely and got across. Then
they charged the Austrians at the point of the bayonet and drove them
back into the village. That, though, was not all. Fresh Austrians had
turned back to help their rearguard troops. Firing from the river-bank
on either side of the village, for a time they stopped the other
French regiments from crossing the bridge after the 59th. Austrian
dragoons and infantry at the same time charged the gallant regiment,
entirely isolated now on that side of the river. But they could not
break the 59th. Forming square, the two battalions, with their Eagles
held on high as rallying-centres, kept a host of foes at bay. Three
fierce Austrian charges did they beat off--and then help arrived.
A second regiment, the 50th, had by then managed to get across the
bridge. The two regiments maintained themselves there all the afternoon
until nightfall and then bivouacked on the ground they had won until
morning, “passing an anxious time, under arms, unable to light a fire.
Fortunately, in the dark the Austrians did not realise our small
numbers. They were more anxious to cover their own retreat.” Before
daylight the Austrians fell back and the passage of the Danube was won.

There was another morning’s work on October 11.

[Sidenote: THE EAGLES AT HASLACH]

At Haslach, on the north bank of the Danube, not far from Ulm, a
brigade of Dupont’s Division of Ney’s corps, advancing on that side
on its own account, was suddenly set on by five times its number of
Austrians. The brigade was made up of three regiments: the 9me Légère
(or 9th Light Infantry), the 32nd, and the 69th. They stumbled, as it
were, suddenly on the Austrians, whereupon General Dupont, who was
riding with the brigade, on the opposite side of the river from the
rest of his troops, “judging that if he fell back it would betray
his weakness,” made a dash at the enemy. His daring deceived the
Austrians, who believed that he was the advanced guard of a large force
close behind. They held back at first and awaited attack. Throwing
the 32nd into Haslach to hold the village, Dupont boldly charged with
the two other regiments, and at the first onset made 1,500 prisoners,
numbers equal to a quarter of his total force. The Austrians, however,
rallied and returned to the fight. They brought up reinforcements and
entrenched themselves in the village of Jüningen, near by, where again
Dupont attacked them. Five times did the 9th Light Infantry take and
retake Jüningen at the point of the bayonet, their two battalion Eagles
heading the attack each time. No fewer than six officers, bearing the
Eagles in turn, fell in the fight. “Ces corps ne devaient étonner de
rien,” commented Napoleon in praising Dupont and his men.

At Elchingen, a village in the immediate neighbourhood of Ulm, the
scene of the brilliant victory by which Marshal Ney won his title of
Due d’Elchingen, the Eagles of two regiments won distinction, through
the individual heroism of the officers who, holding them on high,--“En
haut l’Aigle!” was the charging cry--led the onset that stormed the
place.[7]

[Sidenote: THE EAGLES STORM ELCHINGEN]

Ney headed the 6th Light Infantry personally, “in full uniform and
ablaze with decorations, offering a splendid target to the enemy.” Ney
led the 6th with the Eagle of the First Battalion carried close at
his side. Fifteen thousand Austrians with forty guns held Elchingen,
and the post is described as being “one of the strongest positions
that could be imagined.” The village itself, a large place, consisted
of “successive piles of stone houses, intersected at right angles
by streets, rising in the form of an amphitheatre from the banks of
the Danube to a large convent which crowns the summit of the ascent.
All the exposed points on heights were lined with artillery; all the
windows filled with musketeers.” The village was on the north bank, and
the river had to be crossed to get to it.

First the gallant 6th Light Infantry stormed the bridge. It had been
partly destroyed by the Austrians on the day before, and its tottering
arches were now swept by cannon-balls, plunging down from batteries on
the heights in rear, and a tornado of bullets from sharpshooters in the
houses near the river-side. Fighting their way forward step by step,
the 6me Légère went on. Their Eagle headed the advance. Its bearer was
wounded, but he proudly brandished on high the standard; its silken
flag torn to tatters by bullets, and with one wing of the Eagle broken
by a shot. With the 6th fought the 69th of the Line. The two regiments
forced their way along the steep crooked main street up hill, fired
down on furiously meanwhile from the windows. Parties of men at times
entered the houses at the sides and fought the enemy inside bayonet to
bayonet, from floor to floor. The 6th and the 69th pressed forward,
broke down the enemy’s resistance, and carried Elchingen. The Austrians
finally, after a gallant attempt to hold out in the convent on the
hilltop, abandoned it as fresh French troops came up from across the
river.

On the battlefield, when the fight was over, Napoleon, with the
Imperial staff round him, publicly congratulated Marshal Ney (he named
him later “Duc D’Elchingen”) in the presence of the 6th Light Infantry
and the 69th, specially paraded at the spot for the occasion.

[Sidenote: THE EAGLES AT ULM]

The Eagles of Ney, again, were foremost at the winning of the final
fight at Ulm. They led the furious onrush that stormed the steep
heights of Michelsberg and Les Tuileries, the key of the last Austrian
position. Thence Napoleon looked down directly into the fortress; and
within an hour of Ney’s brilliant final feat the French shells, from
batteries, quickly galloped up to the heights, were bursting in Ulm,
carrying terror and death into every quarter of the city.

On that came the surrender of General Mack. The curtain next rises on
the intensely dramatic Fifth Act of the tragedy, the march out of the
Austrians to lay down their arms.

In that display the Eagles had their allotted place. Before them,
brought forward and prominently paraded, each Eagle in advance of its
own corps in line, with the whole Grand Army ranged in battle order as
spectators of the scene, the standards of the vanquished foe defiled
out of the gates of Ulm, and were laid down on the ground in formal
token of surrender.

Napoleon proved himself at Ulm a born stage-manager.

Hardly ever before, never in modern war, had such a spectacle been
witnessed as that presented on that chill and cheerless October Sunday
forenoon, October 20, 1805, in the heart of central Germany, beside the
banks of the rushing Danube, roaring past, a yellow foaming torrent
after weeks of autumn rain, amid pine-clad summits extending far and
wide on either hand.

Along the lower slopes of the high ground to the north and east of
Ulm, drawn up in lines and columns over a wide semi-circle, stood the
victorious army; massed round, as it were, in a vast amphitheatre. They
formed up by army corps, and took post grim and silent, drawn up in
battle array, with muskets loaded and bayonets fixed. The Cavalry with
sabres drawn were on one side; the Infantry on the other, facing them
and leaving a space between, along which the Austrians were to pass.
Fifty loaded cannon, in line along one ridge, pointed down on the city.
In front, towards the river, there rose a small knoll, an outlying spur
of rock. On that Napoleon took his station beside a blazing watchfire
which marked the spot from far. Accompanying him were most of the
marshals and the assembled Etat-Major of the Grand Army, a numerous and
brilliant gathering. Immediately in rear stood massed the 10,000 men of
the Imperial Guard.

Two army corps, a little way from the rest, had a special post of
honour. They were drawn up at the end of the wide semi-circle of the
main army nearest the Augsburg gate of Ulm; immediately where the
defilading column of captives would present themselves before passing
Napoleon to lay down their arms and standards. The two corps were: that
on the right, Ney’s, the Sixth Army Corps, the heroes of the day _par
excellence_; on the left, the Second Corps, Marmont’s, who had been
doing notable work elsewhere in the neighbourhood of Ulm. Ney, with his
personal staff beside him, was on horseback in front of the centre of
his corps; Marmont had his post in like manner in front of his men. As
his personal reward for the leading part Ney and the Sixth Corps had
had in bringing about the triumph, that marshal had the special honour
of being designated to superintend the surrender.

A few minutes before ten o’clock the French drums began to beat, and
the regimental bands to play. Immediately after that the long-drawn-out
procession of sullen and woebegone-looking Austrian captives began
silently to trail its way out of the Stuttgart gate of the fortress.
“Suddenly we saw an endless column file out of the town and march up in
front of the Emperor, on the plain at the foot of a mountain.”

[Sidenote: MACK SURRENDERS HIS SWORD]

General Mack himself headed it, wan-faced and pale as the white
uniform coat he wore, his eyes filled with tears, his head bowed,
a pitiful and abject figure to behold. After him followed eighteen
Austrian generals--a surprising number--most of them as wretched
and downcast-looking as their chief. “Behold, Sire, the unfortunate
Mack!” was the ill fated leader’s address to Napoleon, as he formally
presented his sword. Napoleon, in a mood--as well he might be--in
that hour of unparalleled triumph, to show courtesy to the fallen
foe, desired Mack to keep his sword and remain at his side. He said
the same to the eighteen other generals as, one by one, they came up
in turn to tender him their swords. He returned each his sword and
bade them all place themselves near their chief. When all the swords
had been presented and returned, Napoleon made the Austrian generals
collectively a short harangue. “Gentlemen,” he began, “war has its
chances! Often victorious, you must expect sometimes to be vanquished!”
He did not really know, Napoleon went on, why they were fighting.
Their master had begun against him an unjust war. “I want nothing on
the Continent,” said Napoleon in conclusion, “only ships, colonies,
and commerce!” It was on the day before Trafalgar that these memorable
words were spoken. The Austrian generals stared at Napoleon blankly,
but not one uttered a word. “They were all very dull; it was the
Emperor alone who kept up the conversation.” Then they took their stand
beside their conqueror and looked on at the bitterly humiliating scene
of the defilade of their fellow soldiers.

[Sidenote: THE PARADE OF THE VANQUISHED]

In an almost incessant throng the columns of the Austrian army
streamed by: white-clad cuirassiers; hussars in red and blue and grey;
battery after battery of cocked-hatted, brown-garbed artillerymen,
riding with or on their rumbling dull-yellow wheeled guns; battalion
after battalion of white-coated linesmen; dark-green coated jägers;
Hungarian grenadiers, and so on. Twenty-seven thousand officers and
men and sixty field-guns in all defiled past the Eagles, proudly
arrayed there above them, in front of the serried lines of glittering
French bayonets along the hillsides. For five hours on end the host
of captives plodded on before the rocky brow from which Napoleon
surveyed the spectacle; tramping by, their muskets without bayonets
and unloaded, their cartridge-boxes emptied. In several regiments the
men maintained a fair semblance of discipline and military order; but
the ranks of all were sadly bedraggled-looking, the white uniforms
torn and soiled and besmirched with powder-smoke, with many of the men
hatless, or limping from wounds, or with bound-up heads, and their arms
in bloodstained slings. As had been ordered by Napoleon, they carried
with them their standards; no fewer than forty silken battle-flags--for
the most part cased, but here and there was to be seen one not furled,
displaying, as though in futile defiance, its flaunting yellow folds
with the double-headed Black Eagle.

As the Austrian linesmen came abreast of where Napoleon stood, the
pace of the men slackened. Every eye was turned to look at “him”; at
the small grey-coated figure on foot beside the watchfire, standing
near the crestfallen group of their own generals, a few paces from the
bright and brilliant-hued cavalcade of French marshals and the staff.
All stared at Napoleon, gazing as if under a spell. Then, in the midst
of it all, this happened. Suddenly, as they passed Napoleon, a shout
rose from among the ranks of the defeated army: “Es lebe der Kaiser!”
(“Long live the Emperor!”) The cry burst forth with startling effect.
It was repeated, and then several men took it up. But what did it
mean? “Es lebe der Kaiser!” was the national German greeting in salute
to their own Austrian sovereign as Head of the Empire, to the Kaiser
at Vienna, the Emperor of Germany. Did the soldiers who first raised
the cry intend it for that, or to hail Napoleon, as his own men did,
with a “Vive l’Empereur!”? The words bore the same meaning. Or did the
men fling the words at Napoleon in a sort of bravado, as a show of
defiance? Some of the Austrians assuredly did mean them so; to relieve
the breaking strain, the terrible tension of the ordeal. At least some
of the French officers near Napoleon took that view of it. “As they
passed by,” describes one, “the prisoners, seized with wonder, with
admiration, slowed down in their march to gaze at their conqueror,
and some cried out ‘Long live the Emperor!’ but no doubt under very
different emotions; some with evident mortification.”

[Sidenote: GIVING UP THE GUNS AND HORSES]

From the presence of Napoleon the captive army passed to the scene of
the act of final humiliation: to the place where, midway between the
lines of bayonets of the troops of Ney and Marmont, they were to lay
down their colours and ground their arms.

The colours were first surrendered, a French General, Andréossi,
formerly Napoleon’s Ambassador in London, receiving them, with half a
dozen staff officers and orderlies, who deposited the flags one by one
in two commissariat wagons drawn up close by.

It was a moment of the deepest and keenest anguish for proud and
gallant soldiers. All round them on the hillsides most of the French,
overcome by excitement over the unprecedented and amazing spectacle,
were by that time almost beside themselves, rending the air with
exulting shouts and cheers. Under the cruel stress of the ordeal,
as the supreme moment came on, the self-possession of some of the
Austrians, tried beyond endurance, gave way.

The men of the Cavalry and Artillery bore themselves throughout with
well-disciplined steadiness. As they came to the appointed place where
groups of French cavalry troopers and gunners, told off to take over
their horses and guns, were standing near the roadside awaiting them,
they dismounted at the word of command from their own commanders
and stood back. With hardly a murmur from the ranks the Austrian
troopers unbuckled their swords and carbines and pistols, and dropped
them in heaps at the places pointed out to them. With quiet dignity
the officers relinquished their gold-embroidered banners into the
enemy’s hands. In grim silence they saw the victors--who there at
any rate behaved with courtesy and soldierly consideration for the
feeling of the vanquished--step forward to take possession of their
horses and their cannon. Many of the Austrians had tears running down
their cheeks; some stood trembling with suppressed passion;--but all
preserved order and behaved with complete decorum as became disciplined
soldiers.

With others unfortunately, with some of the infantry corps, it was
otherwise. At the very last, before arriving at the place where they
were to give up their weapons, a number of the men in some of the
marching regiments broke down under the fearful strain of the moment
and lost their heads. In many regiments, no doubt, the soldiers obeyed
mechanically, acting like men half stunned after a violent shock; they
did as they were told, and passively grounded their arms to order.
But in others the final scene was attended by acts of wild frenzy,
pitiful to behold. In, as it were, a paroxysm of exasperation at the
disgrace that had befallen them, the rank and file of these broke out
recklessly, and got at once beyond all efforts of their officers to
control. With one accord they began smashing the locks and butts of
their muskets on the ground with savage curses, flinging away their
arms all round, and stripping off their accoutrements and stamping on
them, trampling them down in the mud. These, though, as has been said,
were only some of the men; and in certain regiments. The majority of
the Austrians bore themselves with fortitude and calmness.

At the end of the afternoon the Imperial Guard, headed by their Eagle
and band, marched into Ulm and through the city, as we are told, “amid
the shouts of the whole populace.”

So terminated the tragedy of Ulm, in the presence of the Eagles on
their first triumphant battlefield.

[Sidenote: THE ULM TROPHIES FOR PARIS]

The spoils of the Eagles at all points, as announced by Napoleon in
the Ulm Bulletin of the Grand Army, were 60,000 prisoners, 200 pieces
of cannon, and, in all, 90 flags. The 40 standards surrendered at Ulm
itself Napoleon sent to Paris forthwith--after a grand parade of the
trophies at Augsburg, in which ninety sergeants of the Imperial Guard
bore in procession the Austrian flags. The Ulm trophies were made an
Imperial gift for the Senate. “It is a homage,” wrote Napoleon, “which
I and my Army pay to the Sages of the Empire.” They were the flags, it
may be added, which were displayed at the head of Napoleon’s coffin on
the occasion of his State funeral in 1840: they form four-fifths of the
trophies now grouped round Napoleon’s tomb. Alone of the trophies of
the Ulm campaign, and also of the Austerlitz campaign which followed
it, they escaped destruction in the holocaust of Napoleon’s trophies
that took place at the Invalides in March 1814, on the night of the
surrender of Paris to the Allies. How that came to pass will be told
later.

There was a very interesting sequel to the Ulm campaign for one of
Ney’s regiments. A brief but brilliant campaign in the Tyrol on their
own account followed for Ney’s men immediately after Ulm.

Entering the Tyrol with two of his divisions, Ney attacked and
by brilliant tactics overthrew the Tyrolese forces and Austrian
regulars who barred his way in a position among the mountains deemed
impregnable. The battalion Eagles of the 69th gave the signal for
the frontal attack which stormed the enemy’s position. Guided by
chamois-hunters the soldiers with the Eagles scaled the face of a
precipitous line of crags which overhung in rear the Austrian centre,
by inserting their bayonets into fissures in the rocks and clinging
to shrubs and creepers, their havresacs tied round their heads as
protection from the stones that the Tyrolese above showered down on
them. At the top, driving in the defenders, they held up the gleaming
Eagles in the sunlight on the brink of the precipice to the marshal
below, firing down on the Austrians at the same time to demoralise
their resistance and clear the way for Ney’s main effort: “Les Aigles
du 69me plantées sur la cime des rochers servirent de signal à
l’attacque de front que le Maréchal Ney avait preparé.”

Innsbrück, the capital of the Tyrol, and the head-quarters of the
Austrian army corps garrisoning the country, was the immediate prize of
the victory. It was there that this incident took place.

[Sidenote: TWO LOST FLAGS ARE FOUND]

One of Ney’s regiments, the 76th, had fought in the Tyrol six years
before; in Masséna’s campaign of 1799, in one of the battles of
which--at Senft in the Grisons, on August 22--two of its battalions
lost their colours. An officer of the regiment, while visiting the
arsenal at Innsbrück after Ney’s capture of the city, came across the
two flags there, in tatters from bullet-holes, hung up as trophies. He
made known his discovery, and the place was quickly filled with the
soldiers of the regiment, eager to see the old flags. “They crowded
round them and kissed the fragments of their old colours, with tears in
their eyes.”

Ney had the flags removed at once. He restored them to the custody
of the regiment with his own hand at a grand parade in the presence
of the rest of his army, which the marshal attended with his staff,
all in full uniform. The old colours were received with an elaborate
display of military ceremonial. They were borne along the lines while
the regimental band played a stately march, and the Eagles of both
battalions were formally dipped in salute to them.

On receiving Ney’s report, Napoleon thought fit to give the recovery
of the flags a Bulletin to itself. Relating how they had been lost in
battle, and the “affliction profonde” of the regiment in consequence,
he set forth how they had been found and handed back by Marshal Ney to
the regiment “with an affecting solemnity that drew tears from the eyes
of both the old soldiers and the young conscripts, proud of having had
their share in regaining them!” “Le soldat Français,” concluded the
Bulletin, “a pour ses drapeaux un sentiment qui tient de la tendresse;
ils sont l’objet de son culte, comme un présent reçu des mains d’une
mère.” A medal was specially struck to commemorate the event; and
Napoleon, in addition, specially commissioned an artist, Meynier,
to paint a picture for him of Marshal Ney presenting the recovered
colours to the regiment. The painting is now in one of the galleries of
Versailles.


THE MIDNIGHT BATTLE BY THE DANUBE

[Sidenote: TRAPPED BY NAPOLEON’S FAULT]

A startling and dramatic episode of the first campaign of the Eagles
comes next. It took place during the second stage of the war; in
the midst of Napoleon’s impetuous advance on Vienna down the Danube
valley after Ulm. Intent on dealing a shattering blow at the advanced
army corps of the Russians, which had reached Lower Austria and was
making an effort to cover the capital, Napoleon made a false move,
and left one of the headmost French divisions in an exposed position,
temporarily isolated. It got trapped by the Russians at Dürrenstein, or
Dirnstein, on the north side of the Danube, to the west of and about
seventy miles up the river from Vienna; and was all but annihilated.
There was nearly twenty hours of continuous fighting, including a night
battle of the fiercest and most desperate character in which three
Eagles were temporarily lost; fortunately to be recovered later among
the dead on the battlefield.[8]

It was on an extemporised corps, specially placed under the command of
Marshal Mortier, that the blow fell.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON’S CONCENTRATION IN REAR OF ULM]

While Napoleon and the Grand Army in force advanced along the south, or
right, bank of the Danube, Mortier had been detached across the river
to hold in check any attempt to interfere with the main operations
from the Bohemian side. A body of Austrian cavalry, under the Archduke
Ferdinand, had managed to cut their way through from Ulm at one point
just before the closing of the net round General Mack. With the aid of
the local militia levies these might prove troublesome on the line of
communications. To deal with them, three divisions, drawn from as many
corps, were amalgamated as Mortier’s special corps, which numbered in
all between twenty and twenty-five thousand men: Gazan’s division, lent
by Marshal Lannes; Dupont’s, lent by Ney; Dumonceau’s, lent by Marmont.
To keep Mortier in touch with the main body of the army, and that he
might be reinforced in emergency, a flotilla of Danube craft was at
the same time improvised, and placed in charge of the Seamen of the
Guard, a battalion of whom had accompanied Napoleon for the campaign.
The flotilla was to keep pace with Mortier and link him with Napoleon.
Mortier crossed at Linz and moved forward; his three divisions each a
day’s march apart, for convenience of provisioning. He marched so fast,
however, that he outstripped the connecting boats.

[Sidenote: THE DANUBE FLOTILLA STOPPED]

At the moment the fighting opened, the flotilla was miles in rear.
It had been stopped and its progress blocked near Moelkt, unable in
the swollen state of the Danube to pass the dangerous Strudel, or
whirlpool, there, raging just then, after the heavy autumn rains,
with the force of a swirling maelstrom. The flooded river had made it
extremely difficult work all the way, even for the picked Seamen of
the Guard, to navigate with safety the assortment of boats and timber
rafts, clumsy structures of logs and spars lashed together, 160 feet
long each, and planked over, with cabins on the planks, which composed
the flotilla. On them, together with a quantity of spare stores and
ammunition for the army, convalescents and footsore men of various
regiments were being carried, who, it was intended, would thus be on
the spot to reinforce Mortier first of all in case of danger.

Immediately after passing Dürrenstein, the leading division, General
Gazan’s, numbering some 6,000 men, unexpectedly stumbled across part
of the Russian rearguard. All unknown to Mortier, the Russian army
corps which had been entrenched in front of Vienna had abandoned its
position and had hastily withdrawn north of the river, crossing a short
distance from Dürrenstein.

Mortier, after clearing a narrow and difficult pass on the eastern
side of Dürrenstein, with steep and rocky hills on one hand and the
Danube on the other, first learned of the presence of the enemy by
catching sight of the smoke of the burning bridge of Krems, which the
Russians had set fire to after passing over. Then he suddenly found
his further advance barred by troops with guns, who rapidly formed up
across his path. The Russians took up a formidable-looking position,
but the marshal decided to attack without waiting for Dupont to come
up with the Second Division, or for the flotilla; both miles in rear.
The sight of the burning bridge and the apparent haste of the enemy
to get across the river, it would seem, misled Mortier into thinking
that the Russians had been in action with Napoleon, and were in flight,
trying to escape. He went at them without pausing to reconnoitre. He
assumed that they were only making a show of defence. The troops before
him he would sweep aside easily. Then he would press on and complete
the rout of the rest of the Russians, whom he took to be retreating in
confusion, screened by the force he saw, across his front. Confident
of easy success, Mortier entered into the fight then and there.

[Sidenote: A SURPRISE FOR THE MARSHAL]

The sudden rencontre, as has been said, was a surprise for the
marshal. Half an hour previously a battle had been almost the last
thing in Mortier’s thoughts. His guns were on board a number of river
boats which were being drifted downstream abreast of the troops, the
artillery horses being led with the marching columns along the bank.
The boats had been requisitioned a few miles back, so as to enable
the troops to get on faster over the rough stretch of road through
the Pass of Dürrenstein. The guns were hastily disembarked and raced
forward into the firing line in order to stop a forward movement that
the Russians, who promptly took advantage of the opportunity offered by
Mortier being apparently without artillery, began by making.

The Russians came on and quickly increased in numbers, to Marshal
Mortier’s further surprise. Were those beaten troops in full flight?
They began to swarm down to meet the French; heading for the guns as
these were being brought forward. The fight rapidly became general, and
charge after charge was made by the Russians to carry Mortier’s guns.
They captured them, but were then beaten back and the guns recaptured.
Twice were the guns taken and retaken. The two French regiments nearest
the guns, the 100th and 103rd, defended them with brilliant courage,
their four battalion Eagles conspicuous in the forefront and repeatedly
the centre of desperate fighting, as the Russians essayed again and
again at the point of the bayonet to make prize of the gleaming emblems.

But more and more Russians kept joining in, and after four hours of
very severe fighting the marshal began to get anxious. He had gained
ground towards Krems, and had made some 1,500 prisoners; but every
foot of the way had been stubbornly contested, and his losses had been
serious.

Mortier after that left the troops, and with an aide de camp galloped
back through the pass in order to hasten up Dupont. But the Second
Division was still at a distance. Dupont’s men were still a long way
beyond Dürrenstein and could not arrive for some time yet. Mortier
could only tell them not to lose a moment, and then retrace his own
steps. On his way back, to his amazement, he came upon a second Russian
column in great strength in the act of debouching from a side pass and
entering Dürrenstein. It had come round by a track among the hills on
the north to take Gazan’s division in rear, and interpose between it
and Dupont’s reinforcing troops. At considerable personal risk the
marshal managed to evade discovery by the Russians. By following a
devious by-path he at length got back to where Gazan’s division was;
as before, in hot action and slowly forcing the Russians back.

[Sidenote: TOO LATE TO CLEAR THE PASS]

Mortier stopped the advance at once. He faced his troops about, and,
while keeping off his original enemy, retreated; closing his columns
and rushing all back as fast as possible to repass the defile of
Dürrenstein and confront the new enemy on the further side, in a
position he might hold until Dupont could reinforce him. But it was
already too late. The French reached the entrance of the pass on the
near side to find it already occupied by the Russians, who were pouring
through in dense masses. There were nearly 20,000 of them on that side
of him and 15,000 on the other, his former foes now fast closing in
from behind hard on his heels. Mortier’s reduced ranks numbered barely
4,000 all told.

Owing to the high, steep rocks on one hand, and the river on the other,
it was impossible to push past the Russians on either flank. All that
could be done was to attack in front and try to cut a way through.
That; or to surrender! With reckless impetuosity the French attacked,
firing furiously and flinging themselves on the Russian bayonets;
while their rearguard, facing round, kept their first foes back. For
two long hours they fought like that; their ranks swept by the enemy’s
cannon on each side. At length they forced the entrance to the pass:
but they could get no farther. They had by then lost all their guns
but two: but they still had all their Eagles. With bullet-holes through
some of them, and their silken flags shot away or torn to tatters,
the Eagles did their part. Now they were rallying-centres; now they
were leading charges. There was hardly a battalion in which the first
standard-bearer had not gone down.

All were fighting almost without hope, holding out in sheer despair
as long as they had cartridges left, when, as that dreadful November
afternoon was drawing to its close, suddenly, from beyond the far end
of the pass was heard the booming of a distant cannonade. The soldiers
heard it and hope revived. It could only be Dupont! Help, then, was
coming! The despairing rank and file took heart again--but the hour of
rescue was not yet.

They had four long hours more to go through; every hour making their
terrible situation worse. At nightfall “our cavalry gave way, our
firing slackened, our bayonets, from incessant use, became bent and
blunted. The confusion became terrible. Things, indeed, could hardly
have got worse.” So an officer describes. The enemy, in places, had
got right in among them, but “our soldiers, being the handier and more
agile, had an advantage over the great clumsy Russians.” Here and there
“the men were so close, that they seized each other by the throat.”
In the midst of the fiercest of the fighting the tall figure of the
marshal was conspicuous. He was seen amid the flashes from the muskets
“at the head of a party of grenadiers, sword in hand, laying about him
like any trooper.”

[Sidenote: “YOUR DUTY IS TO SAVE THE EAGLES!”]

The Battalion-Eagles of the 100th, with their Porte-Aigles and a
handful of soldiers, got cut off together, amid a surging _mêlée_
of Russians. The major of the regiment, Henriot by name, the senior
surviving officer--the colonel of the 100th, as also the colonel of the
103rd, had fallen earlier in the fight--saw what was happening and the
extreme peril of the Eagles. Calling for volunteers, he got together
some of his men, cut his way through to the Eagles, and rescued them.
Major Henriot, after that, having saved the Eagles for the moment,
determined as a last resource to attempt a forlorn-hope charge; to
get beyond the enemy and reach Dupont with them. It might be possible
to save them under the cover of darkness. One of the Porte-Aigles of
the 6th Light Infantry with his Eagle, near by at the moment, joined
the devoted band of men that the intrepid major now managed to rally
round the Eagles of the 100th. With half a dozen stirring words Henriot
called on them to follow him. “Comrades, we must break through! They
are more than we, but you are Frenchmen: you don’t count numbers!
Remember, your duty is to save the Eagles of France!” (“Souvenez vous
qu’il s’agit de sauver les Aigles Françaises!”)

There was a hoarse shout in reply: “We are all Grenadiers! Pas de
charge!”

They dashed at the Russians, Henriot leading, and, after fighting their
way through the pass and nearly to Dürrenstein, fell to a man. Yet the
three Eagles did not fall into Russian hands, thanks to the darkness.
They were found next morning by French search-parties under a heap of
dead, where the last survivors, fighting back to back, had fallen while
making their final stand.

So desperate, indeed, did things look for the French at one time, a
little before midnight, that some of his staff appealed to Mortier to
make his escape and get across to the other side of the Danube in a
boat, “so that a Marshal of France shall not fall into the hands of the
enemy!”

But the gallant veteran flatly refused to listen to the proposal.

“No,” was his answer, “certainly not! I will not desert my brave
comrades! I will save them or die with them! Keep the boats for the
wounded,” he went on. “We have still two guns and some case-shot--rally
and make a last effort!”

Almost immediately afterwards an opportunity did offer for the marshal
to save them.

[Illustration: MARSHAL MORTIER.]

[Sidenote: A DASH IN THE DARK TO HELP]

Two of Dupont’s regiments at that moment reached the battle. By
persistent exertions, outstripping the rest of the Second Division,
and continuing in the dark, guided by the flashes of the guns, they
had made their way by a goat-path along the steep rocky slopes at the
side of the defile and taken the Russians barring Mortier’s retreat in
rear. Instantly the new arrivals flung themselves hotly into the fight.
They were the 9th Light Infantry and the 32nd of the Line, that old
favourite of Napoleon’s in the days of the Army of Italy, whose flag on
the Eagle-staff bore, as has been said, the golden inscription which
Napoleon had placed there--“J’étais tranquille, le brave 32me était là.”

The golden legend was of good omen for Mortier.

Their interposition put the Russian main force between two fires,
weakening the attack on Mortier and compelling a portion of them to
face about. Its effect was speedily felt, and at once; although a
desperate effort by the two regiments to break through and join hands
with Mortier, in which the Eagles of the 9th and 32nd were “taken and
retaken,” was beaten back under pressure of numbers.

The arrival of the two regiments so opportunely put heart into all:
Dupont’s whole division, declared the marshal, could not be far off.
He himself would make an effort to meet him on the farther side of the
pass.

“Then,” as is described by Napoleon’s aide de camp, Count de Sègur,
“rallying and closing up the remaining troops, he brought up the
only two guns left him. One was to point towards Krems and against
Kutusoff’s troops; the other Mortier placed at the head of the column,
in the direction of Dürrenstein. As all the drums had been broken he
had the charge sounded on iron cooking-cans.

“At that moment the Austrian general, Schmidt, who had led the Russian
corps from Dürrenstein, headed a final charge which was to strike a
crushing blow and complete the destruction of our column. But Fabvier
(the colonel in charge of Mortier’s artillery) heard them advance.
Concealed by the darkness, he let Schmidt approach quite near. Then
he suddenly fired the gun on that side, at the shortest range, in
among the headmost of the attacking troops. The discharge threw the
enemy into confusion and killed their leader. Into this bloody opening
Mortier and Gazan precipitated themselves, overthrowing everything
before them. Dürrenstein itself was retaken in the impetuous dash.”

It was indeed a _tour de force_; a sudden reversal of the fortunes
of the fight. The feat in its complete accomplishment surprised even
Mortier’s expectations. “The Marshal, in fact, could hardly believe
his own success.” So an officer puts it. But he had done more than
burst through the toils. As daylight next morning showed, the Russians,
driven headlong, had abandoned six of their guns, and left in the
hands of the French no fewer than twelve standards. Two of them
were taken by the two Dupont regiments which had so gallantly flung
themselves on the Russian rear.

That was as concerned honour and glory. As a set off, barely 2,000
remained of Mortier’s corps of 6,000 men. Two-thirds of the total when
the roll was called next day were found to have fallen on the field.

[Sidenote: THEIR FATE STILL IN DOUBT]

Mortier’s men regained Dürrenstein, all in flames; set on fire by the
Russians as they evacuated the village. But where was Dupont and his
Division? They had heard Dupont’s distant guns just before dark; but
except the two regiments who had been rushed forward independently,
ahead of the main body, starting immediately after Mortier’s visit in
the early afternoon, no help from Dupont had reached them. Gazan’s
wearied survivors of the midnight battle dared not even yet lay aside
their arms. The fight was not all over. The enemy were still near by;
just beyond the outskirts of the village. Both the Russian divisions
that they had been fighting with in front and rear had in the end
united. Outnumbering Mortier’s men as they did by ten to one, the
Russians would certainly turn back and be on them before long with
re-formed ranks, eager to take vengeance for their defeat and the rough
handling they had undergone.

But the end was near.

Suddenly, from the farther side of Dürrenstein, from the direction
in which the enemy had fallen back, there came a violent outburst of
firing. Immediately on that followed sounds of shouting. Then there was
the trampling rush of a great host of men all making for the village.
“With despair in our hearts we were preparing for another battle, when,
in answer to our challenge of ‘Qui vive?’ came back, with electrifying
effect, the answer ‘France!’ It was Dupont. At last he had arrived to
the rescue of his Marshal.

“We recognised each other in the light of the blazing houses, and with
transports of joy and gratitude and cries of ‘Long live our rescuers!’
our men threw themselves on the necks of their deliverers.”

In that dramatic fashion the battle of Dürrenstein reached its close.
The Russians fell back under cover of the night, retreating up the
lateral valley-pass, by which way at the outset they had worked their
way round, guided by the Austrian general, Schmidt, to surprise and cut
off Gazan’s division.

Napoleon, in his great relief at learning that Mortier had come through
without disaster, for once blamed nobody. He knew that he himself was
most of all to blame, for exposing to sudden attack a comparatively
weak detachment of his army in the face of an enemy still full of
fight, on the farther side of a deep and rapid river. “It seemed,”
in Marbot’s words, “as if no explanation of this operation beyond the
Danube satisfactory to military men being possible, there was a desire
to hush up its consequences.”

[Sidenote: BY WAY OF COVERING THE BLUNDER]

By way of covering up his own glaring blunder Napoleon heaped praises
on the troops engaged. He expressed unbounded admiration at the stand
they had made. In the 22nd “Bulletin of the Grand Army,” issued from
Schönbrunn, near Vienna, two days later, the Emperor declared that
“le combat de Dürrenstein sera à jamais mémorable dans les annales
militaires.” Gazan, he said, had shown “beaucoup de valeur et de
conduite.” The 4me and 9me Légère and the 32nd and 100th of the Line,
wrote Napoleon, “se sont couverts de gloire.”




CHAPTER IV

ON THE FIELD OF AUSTERLITZ


Austerlitz, the crowning triumph of the First War of the Grand Army,
set its _cachet_ to the fame of the Eagles.

Napoleon there lured the enemy on into attacking him at apparent
disadvantage on ground of his own choosing. Then, availing himself to
the fullest extent of the flagrant blundering of his assailants, he
struck at them with a smashing, knock-down blow from the shoulder.

[Sidenote: LURED ON TO MEET THEIR FATE]

By making believe that his army was separated in detachments, out of
touch, and beyond possibility of early concentration, and causing
it to appear further that he had become alarmed for his own safety
and was on the point of commencing a retreat, he decoyed them into
a false move. He tempted the Czar Alexander, whose main force had
arrived within a few miles of Vienna, and was confronting him, into
making a rash manœuvre designed to cut his line of communications and
defeat him before the second Austrian army in the field, under the
Archduke Charles, hastening from the Italian frontier to join hands
with the Russians, could reach the scene. In the confident belief that
by themselves they outnumbered Napoleon at the critical point by two
to one, with nearly 90,000 men to 40,000, the Russians made a risky
flank march to interpose between Napoleon and his base, and drive him
in rout into the wilds of Bohemia. They began their advance suddenly,
on Thursday, November 2, but immediately afterwards wasted two days
through faulty leadership. Before they could get within striking
distance of Napoleon he had called in his detached corps and had massed
70,000 men at the point of danger. Foreseeing the possibility of the
enemy’s move, his apparent disposal of the various corps had been
elaborately arranged so as to ensure concentration at short notice in
case of emergency.

From hour to hour during Sunday, December 1, the Russian army in dense
columns streamed past within six miles of the French position in full
view of Napoleon, all marching forward in stolid silence, intent only
on getting between Napoleon and Vienna. No counter-move meanwhile was
made from the French side. Strict orders were sent to the outposts
that not a shot was to be fired. But by the early afternoon all was
ready for action. Completely seeing through the enemy’s plans, Napoleon
exclaimed in a tone of absolute confidence: “Before to-morrow night
that army is mine!”

On Napoleon’s right flank, in a strong defensive position, stood
Marshal Davout’s corps, thrown back at an angle to the main front of
the army, so as to induce the enemy to extend themselves widely on
that side before opening their attack. Marshal Soult’s corps, the
most powerful in the Grand Army, formed the centre; supported by the
Imperial Guard, Oudinot’s Grenadier Division, and two divisions of
Mortier’s corps. Marshal Lannes’ corps, with Bernadotte’s, was on
the left, as well as Murat’s cavalry. Napoleon proposed to allow the
Russian leading columns to circle round his right flank and get into
action with Davout. Then, as soon as they were committed to their
attack in that quarter, Soult’s immense force would hurl itself on the
Russian centre and break through it by sheer weight of numbers. Thus
the Allied Army would be cleft in two, after which Napoleon would only
have to fling his weight to either side for the enemy to be destroyed
in detail. During Soult’s move, Lannes on the left flank was to hold
in check by a brisk attack the Russian right wing and reserves, which
would prevent assistance reaching the centre until too late to save the
day. So the battle was planned; so it was fought and won.

[Illustration: Sketch Plan of the Positions of the Armies at the
opening of the Battle of AUSTERLITZ]

The Allied columns were seen during Sunday afternoon to be steadily
moving southward over a high ridge opposite the French camp,
crowned near the centre by the lofty plateau of Pratzen, the key
of the position on the Russian side. They streamed along from the
direction of the village of Austerlitz, a short distance away to the
north-east, from which the battle took its name. A tract of low marshy
country, the valley of the little river Goldbach, four miles across,
with two or three hamlets dotting it here and there, connected by
narrow cart-roads, divided the two armies. The French position, facing
eastwards, was on a range of tableland along the west side of the
valley of the Goldbach.

[Sidenote: THE KEY OF THE POSITION]

Monday morning came, and the “Sun of Austerlitz”--so often
apostrophised by Napoleon in after days--rose in a cloudless sky above
the early mists lying dense over the marshy ground of the low-lying
valley between the armies. The dominating crest of the Pratzen plateau
showed above the mist almost bare of troops. On the evening before
it had bristled with Russian bayonets, glistening in the rays of the
setting sun. Pratzen, the master-key of the battlefield, had been left
unoccupied. The enemy’s corps had taken no measures to hold it in their
haste to get forward to attack the French right wing, and cut Napoleon
off.

Soult’s corps--the entire French army had been under arms since four
o’clock--was ordered to descend into the valley before the morning mist
dissipated as the sun rose. Under cover of the mist Soult was to get
as close as possible to the foot of the Pratzen Hill, so as to be on
the spot ready to seize the height immediately the battle opened on the
right.

Napoleon waited, standing among the marshals on foot near the centre
of the position, until between seven and eight o’clock. Then sharp
firing suddenly broke out from the direction of Davout’s corps, and a
few minutes later an aide de camp came galloping up with the news that
the enemy were attacking the right wing in great force. “Now,” said
Napoleon, “is the moment.” The marshals sprang on their horses and
spurred off to head their corps.

So Austerlitz opened.

Its first brunt, as Napoleon had foreseen, fell hard and heavily on the
French right wing; but Davout’s men there proved well able to maintain
their ground. The sturdy linesmen on that side disputed every foot
of the position at the point of the bayonet against four times their
numbers.

Right gallantly, time and again, did the Eagles on that part of the
field fulfil their rôle and take their part; now heading charges, now
rallying round them the men who had sworn to die in their defence.

[Sidenote: “SOLDIERS, I STAY HERE!”]

The 15th Light Infantry--a corps in the ranks of which were many young
soldiers, now under fire for the first time in their lives--stormed the
village of Tellnitz, which the Russians had carried in their first
rush on the French outposts. The leading battalion of the 15th drove
the Russians out; and, dashing on beyond the village, met a reinforcing
Russian column hastening to the spot. They charged it without
hesitation, but could not break through, and then they began to recoil
before superior numbers. The Eagle-bearer was shot down, and fell badly
wounded. He had to leave hold of his Eagle, and amid the surging throng
of soldiers in disorder it was in great danger of being trampled under
foot and lost. Fortunately the officer in command, _Chef de Bataillon_
Dulong, saw what had happened, and sprang from his horse and seized
the Eagle. Holding it on high with one hand, he shouted to his men to
stand fast. “Soldiers, I stay here!” he called. “Let me see if you will
abandon your Eagle and your commander.” The act and words checked the
disorder. The battalion rallied at once, re-formed ranks, and made head
against the enemy until help arrived, when the Russians were driven
back.

The Eagle of another battalion in the same division of Davout’s army
corps, General Friant’s, the 111th of the Line, a little time later had
its part. The 111th had suffered heavily in the earlier fighting, but
towards eleven o’clock were called on to lead a counter-attack beyond
the line of fortified hedgerow that the regiment was holding, against
a fresh Russian column which was advancing with loud shouts and
bayonets at the charge to storm their position. Immediately in front
was a wide, open stretch of ground, across which a Russian battery, to
cover the attack, was pouring a tremendous fire of shell, the bursting
projectiles tearing up the ground as if it were being ploughed. Just
as the order to advance was given, the Porte-Aigle fell dead. An old
sergeant, Courbet by name, took his place. He seized the Eagle and
looked round, for several of the men were wavering. They were unwilling
to leave cover for certain death, as it looked, on the shell-swept
space of open ground before them. Courbet climbed over the hedge, and,
waving the Eagle and flag with both hands, stood by himself amid the
bursting shells, some twenty yards in front. “Come on, comrades!” he
shouted--“come on!” Then with the words, “A moi, soldats du 111me!”
brandishing the Eagle, he ran straight at the fast-nearing Russians.
“The effect,” says one who saw the brave deed done, “was electric.” The
men streamed over the hedge instantly, re-formed line in spite of the
cannon-balls, and, led by the grenadiers of the battalion, charged the
approaching enemy, broke them, drove them before them, and seized the
village in front, whence the Russians had made their advance.

The Eagle of the 48th, another of Friant’s regiments, in like manner
was rallied in the moment of supreme crisis by the daring of its
Eagle-bearer.

[Sidenote: SUDDENLY FIRED ON BY FRIENDS]

The Eagle of the 108th, which regiment was fighting near by, all but
fell into the enemy’s hands through a blunder. It was early in the
morning, at the very beginning of the fight, in crossing a marshy
strip under cover of the mist, to take in flank the Russian attack. In
the uncertain light another French regiment, the 26th Light Infantry,
one of Soult’s regiments, moving about a hundred yards on the left
of Davout’s men, mistook the 108th for the enemy, and fired heavily
into it. The Eagle-bearer was among those shot down, and fell with the
Eagle. This sudden blow from an unexpected quarter staggered the 108th.
They fell back hastily to re-form in rear, leaving their Eagle, whose
fall had been unobserved in the mist, lying beside its dead bearer on
the ground. The loss was discovered just as another force of Russians,
who came up in front, reached the place; but before they could carry
off the trophy a charge forward by some hastily rallied men of the
108th recovered the Eagle and bore it back to safety.

So far then with Davout’s corps.

Soult, meanwhile, in the centre, was striking hard. His attack, in its
effect on the Allied Army, was a complete surprise. Soult’s advance
began the instant that the marshal, riding at full gallop from the
presence of Napoleon, could reach his men. At that moment the third of
the Russian columns in the order of march, pressing ahead to overtake
the first and second, and join in the attack on Davout, had not long
descended the southern slope at the foot of the Pratzen heights; while
the fourth Russian column, a mile or more in rear, was just about to
ascend the northern slope to cross the Pratzen Hill and follow.

Up the steep western hillside face of the Pratzen clambered Soult’s
regiments. Unseen by the enemy at any point, without a shot being fired
at them, or by them, until just as they were nearing the crest-line of
the ridge, they emerged from the mists of the valley and seized the
high ground.

They moved on a front of three divisions. Legrand’s was on the right,
echeloned in the direction of Davout’s left flank so as to keep touch
with that marshal. St. Hilaire’s was in the centre, advancing in a long
line of battalions in attack formation. Vandamme’s division was on the
left.

The Allied fourth column caught a glimpse of Vandamme’s men as they
were climbing the last ascent, and raced forward to form up and bar
their way. There were 14,000 troops in the column, half Austrians, half
Russians; and the Czar Alexander with the Emperor of Austria rode with
them.

[Illustration: MARSHAL SOULT.

In the uniform of Colonel-in-Chief of the Chasseurs of the Guard.]

Attacking at once, the French broke through the Allied front line,
and, after a hard fight--for the Austro-Russian regiments, fighting
under the two Sovereigns’ eyes, resisted with desperate valour--forced
it back on the second line with the loss of several guns.

[Sidenote: GRAPE-SHOT AT THIRTY PACES]

Again there the Eagles took their part. On the right of St. Hilaire’s
attack, the brigade of General Thiébault became separated in the
fighting with the Russian foremost line. Its three regiments--the
10th Light Infantry, the 14th, and the 36th--became separated, and
one of them, the 36th, was for a time in danger of being overpowered
by part of the Russian third column, which had faced about on hearing
the firing in rear and was hastening back up the hill. Two Russian
regiments raced up towards them on that side. Some Austrian infantry
of the fourth column, extending in their direction, were at the same
time coming at them on the left. In front the 36th was faced by two
Russian batteries, which dashed up, unlimbered, and blazed away,
firing grape and case shot at barely thirty paces; as well as by some
Russian dragoons, who made as if about to charge. To keep the dragoons
off, the leading battalion attempted to form square; but the men,
breathless after their rush uphill, were in some disorder and for
the moment out of hand. The square, while yet half formed, was then
nearly torn to pieces by a staggering discharge of grape, and several
of the men began to get unsteady. It looked bad for the 36th, when,
of a sudden, Adjutant Labadie, of the First Battalion, snatched the
Eagle from its bearer and ran out in front. He stopped short and held
the Eagle-staff with both hands planted firmly on the ground. Then he
called to the men, in a momentary pause while the Russian gunners were
reloading: “Soldiers of the 36th, rally to the front! Here is your line
of battle!” The men saw him, and obeyed. The disorder ceased. Quickly
deploying to right and left, they dashed at the Russian guns. At the
same moment the other two regiments of the brigade, led by St. Hilaire
and the brigadier, sword in hand, came up at the _pas de charge_,
bayonets levelled. The 10th Light Infantry brilliantly repulsed the
Austrians on one side: the 14th on the other side drove Kamenskoi’s
Russians back down the hill.

Supporting the 10th Light Infantry was the 59th of the Line, one of
Mortier’s corps, of Dupont’s division, which had been sent forward
to help in holding the Pratzen heights. Some of the Russian dragoons
dashed in among them as they deployed to follow the 10th. A Russian
officer cut down the Eagle-bearer and seized the Eagle. Sergeant-Major
Gamier, the “Porte-Aigle,” struggled to his feet in spite of his
wounds, wrested the Eagle back, and with his free hand fought with his
sword and killed the Russian, saving the Eagle.

On St. Hilaire’s left, during this time, Vandamme’s division had had
to fight its way forward against the Russians and Austrians of the
fourth column, several battalions of which, with artillery, had rapidly
taken post along a range of knolls towards the northern edge of the
Pratzen plateau. Driving back at the outset six Russian battalions,
which charged forward to meet them, springing up from the shelter of
a dip in the ground, Vandamme’s men, “without firing a shot, with
the bayonet only, advanced on the main enemy with shouldered arms,
not replying to the Russian musketry.” When within forty yards, they
halted, fired a volley, and dashed in with bayonets lowered. The attack
was successful beyond expectation. The enemy before them were routed,
and all their guns taken, with many prisoners. Then Vandamme received
orders to wheel his division to the right and take in flank the enemy,
at that moment in hot fight with St. Hilaire.

[Sidenote: THE RUSSIAN GUARD COME UP]

Vandamme was in the middle of the move when one of his brigades met
with a sudden and unexpected disaster. Two battalions belonging to the
24th Light Infantry and the 4th of the Line, who fought side by side on
the extreme left of Vandamme’s command, were all but annihilated. As
they were wheeling round, the Russian Imperial Guard came up, hurrying
forward from the Reserve, and set on them fiercely. It was just to the
left of the village of Pratzen, as approached from the French side,
on the farther side of the plateau. The Russian Foot Guards forced the
4th and the 24th Light Infantry back into some vineyards adjoining the
village in disorder. The last to retire was the First Battalion of
the 4th. They had hardly gained the edge of the tract of vineyards,
when, without the least warning of their approach, coming up on their
flank and unseen in the smoke and turmoil of the contest, a more
formidable enemy still assailed them. The Russian Cuirassiers of the
Guard, 2,000 horsemen, troopers of the finest cavalry in the world,
came down on them, and charged them at a gallop on the flank. The Grand
Duke Constantine, brother of the Czar, in person led the Cuirassiers.
Disaster, hideous, overwhelming, crushing, for the two hapless
battalions--that of the 24th Light Infantry was, in like manner, caught
just beyond cover exposed in the open--was the instant result. They
tried to form square at the last moment, but the Cuirassiers were
on them before they could begin the evolution. Both battalions were
practically hurled out of existence within three minutes.

[Sidenote: HOW ONE EAGLE MET ITS FATE]

They were ridden down, trampled on by the huge Russian horses, and
slashed to pieces mercilessly by the giant Russian troopers with their
long straight swords. Both battalions lost their Eagles. That of the
24th Light Infantry was picked up later on the field and restored
to what was left of the ill-fated corps. The Eagle of the 4th was
carried off by the Russians, and is now in the Kazan Cathedral at St.
Petersburg. Yet it was lost with honour; bravely defended to the last.
The Eagle-bearer was cut down. A lieutenant tried to get hold of the
Eagle and save it; he, too, was cut down. A private then snatched it
from the dead officer’s hands, and was in the act of waving it on high
when he in turn was sabred and fell. The Russians made prize of the
trophy at once, and it was carried direct to the Czar Alexander on the
battlefield.

Napoleon, who had moved up near the fighting in the centre, witnessed
the disaster with his own eyes.

The corps, as it happened, too, was one he had taken an interest in.
The 4th of the Line had been in favour with him, and he had appointed
his brother Joseph as its colonel when the 4th was at the Camp of
Boulogne as part of the “Army of England.” He had, indeed, specially
chosen that particular corps for its steadiness. He announced Joseph’s
appointment to it in a message to the Senate on April 18, 1804, “in
order that he should be allowed to contribute to the vengeance which
the French people propose to take for the violation of the Treaty [of
Amiens] and be afforded an opportunity of acquiring a fresh title to
the esteem of the nation.”

In wild panic the survivors of the disaster fled to the rear, tearing
by close past where Napoleon and the Staff were. “They almost rushed
over us and the Emperor himself,” describes De Ségur, who as an aide
de camp was close to the Emperor at the moment. “Our effort to arrest
the rout was in vain. The unfortunate fellows were quite distracted
with fear and would listen to nothing. In reply to our reproaches
for so deserting the field of battle and their Emperor, they shouted
mechanically ‘Vive l’Empereur!’ and they fled away faster than ever.

“Napoleon smiled pitifully. With a scornful gesture, he said to us:
‘Let them go!’ Retaining all his calmness in the midst of the confusion
he despatched Rapp to bring up the Cavalry of the Guard.”

Rapp, another of the Imperial aides de camp, was also Colonel of the
Mamelukes of the Guard. He was at the moment riding close behind
the Emperor. Rapp darted off, and, after taking Napoleon’s order to
charge the Russian Cuirassiers to Marshal Bessières, in command of the
Cavalry of the Guard, he himself led their headmost squadrons forward;
his own swarthy Mamelukes with two squadrons of Chasseurs and one
of Horse Grenadiers. Waving his sabre and calling at the top of his
voice, “Vengeons les! Vengeons nos drapeaux!” “Avenge them! Avenge our
standards!” he led them forward at full gallop. “We dashed at full
speed on the artillery and took them,” described Rapp in a letter. The
guns were those of a Russian battery which had just come into action
close by where the Guard Cuirassiers had charged. “The enemy’s horse
awaited our attack at the halt. They were overthrown by the charge and
fled in confusion, galloping like us over the wrecks of our squares.”

[Sidenote: “WE FOUGHT MAN TO MAN”]

But the Russians rallied quickly. Reinforced by the superb regiment
of the Chevalier Guards, a corps in which all the troopers were men
of birth, they came on to meet the French again. Just at that moment
Bessières, with at his back the magnificent cavalry of Napoleon’s
Guard, came up at full speed. Rapp’s squadrons rejoined, and both
Imperial Guards met in full career. “Again we charged,” says Rapp, “and
this charge was terrible. It was one of the most desperate cavalry
combats ever fought, and lasted several minutes. The brave Morland,
Colonel of the mounted Chasseurs of the Guard, fell by my side. We
fought man to man, and so mingled together that the infantry on neither
side dared fire, lest they should kill their own men.” They fought it
out until the Russians gave back and broke and fled--in full sight of
the Czar and the Austrian Emperor, who from some rising ground near by
had been spectators of the desperate affray.

The survivors of the hapless First Battalion of the 4th of the Line
had meanwhile recovered themselves. Rallied by their officers, they
had been brought back into the battle. They returned with their nerve
restored, now only anxious to make amends for the disgrace they had
brought on the Grand Army. They were in time to join in the final
advance beyond the Pratzen heights and cross bayonets with an Austrian
regiment, from which they took its two standards. That feat, as will be
seen, was to serve them in good stead later on.

The charge of the Cavalry of the Guard practically decided the fate
of the day at Austerlitz. Napoleon at once brought up Oudinot’s
Grenadiers, Bernadotte’s battalions, and the regiments of the Old Guard
to further reinforce Soult’s divisions. The Allied centre was shattered
and driven in at all points, and forced back for a mile-and-a-half
beyond the field of battle. It resisted desperately to the last, and
several fierce counter-attacks were made; but in vain.

[Sidenote: THE DOG THAT SAVED AN EAGLE]

In one of these the Eagle of the Chasseurs à Pied of the Imperial
Guard had a narrow escape. According to the story it was saved by
a dog--“Moustache,” a mongrel poodle that had attached himself to
the corps and become a regimental pet. The Eagle-bearer of the
First Battalion, to whom the dog was much attached, and whom he was
following, was shot, and the Eagle dropped to the ground beneath the
man’s body. An Austrian regiment was making a counter-attack at that
point, and before the Eagle could be picked up, three Austrian soldiers
ran forward to seize it. Two of them attacked the two men of the Eagle
escort. The third was faced by “Moustache,” who kept him off, growling
savagely and snapping at the Austrian from behind the dead body of the
Eagle-bearer. The man dropped his musket, drew his hanger, and cut at
“Moustache,” slicing off a paw. But in spite of that the dog managed
to keep him off until assistance came. Then the three Austrians were
bayoneted and the Eagle was saved. Marshal Lannes, on hearing the
story, had a silver collar made for “Moustache,” with a medal to hang
from it, inscribed on one side, “Il perdit une jambe à la bataille
d’Austerlitz, et sauva le Drapeau de son régiment”; and on the other,
“Moustache, chien Français; qu’il soit partout respecté et cheri comme
un Brave.” “Moustache,” in the end, it may be said, died a soldier’s
death. He was killed by an English cannon-ball at Badajoz, and was
buried on the ramparts there, with a stone over him, inscribed: “Cy git
le brave Moustache.”

The Allied centre broken through, the end came on swiftly all over the
field of battle.

On Napoleon’s left wing, Lannes and Murat had engaged the Russian rear
column (or right wing as they fronted to fight) immediately after Soult
opened the main attack. They had done their part by holding in play
the enemy in front, thus preventing the Allied troops on that side
from moving up to reinforce the centre. There, too, as elsewhere, the
Eagles of Napoleon’s battalions fulfilled their _rôle_; one Eagle in
particular, that of the 13me Légère, achieving special distinction.
When the Allied centre gave way, Lannes and Murat pressed forward
impetuously, forcing their antagonists back, and driving them off the
field to the north-east, past the village of Austerlitz.

Davout, on Napoleon’s right, finished his task at the same time; in no
less workmanship fashion. As Soult swung round his victorious divisions
to the right to take the Russian left wing in rear, Davout’s moment
came and he gave the order to advance. Surging forward with exultant
shouts the stout-hearted defenders of that fiercely contested side of
the field swept down on the assailants they had kept at bay for five
long hours. The Russians did their best to make a brave resistance, but
the day was lost. Formed in close-packed columns they fell back, losing
guns and colours, and hundreds of prisoners.[9]

[Sidenote: VICTORS AND VANQUISHED]

As darkness closed in, the last shots were fired at Austerlitz.
Crushing and complete had been the overthrow. The Allied army fled
in wild panic. It left on the field 30,000 men, dead, wounded, or
prisoners, 100 guns, and 400 ammunition caissons. Forty-five standards
were in the hands of the victors. Twelve thousand men in killed and
wounded was the price Napoleon paid. It was a big price; but the
victory to him was worth the sacrifice. At five next morning an aide
de camp from the Austrian Emperor presented himself before Napoleon to
beg for an immediate suspension of hostilities. The Emperor Francis
himself had an interview with Napoleon during that afternoon, and, as
the result, terms of peace--to include the Austrian Emperor’s Russian
allies--were mutually agreed on; to be formally settled between the
diplomatists as soon as possible, Pressburg in Hungary being named for
the meeting-place.

We come now to the dramatic sequel to Austerlitz which awaited the
ill-fated First Battalion of the 4th of the Line. They had to face
Napoleon and render account to him personally for the loss of their
Eagle. The dreaded interview came some three weeks later; at a grand
parade of Soult’s corps before the Emperor at Schönbrunn--as it befell,
on Christmas Day.

Napoleon, attended by the Imperial Staff, most of the marshals, half
a hundred other officers of rank, and nearly as many aides de camp,
passed down the long line of troops, congratulating most of the
regiments on the parts they had individually taken on the different
battlefields. In due course the Emperor came to the regiments of
Vandamme’s division, ranged in their allotted place, the 4th of the
Line among them. Its First Battalion, reduced by the disaster to a
quarter of the normal strength, stood at the head of the regiment,
looking gloomy and disconsolate, the only corps on parade without its
Eagle.

Napoleon approached the place with a frown on his face and a look as
black as thunder. He reined up opposite the battalion and addressed it
in a loud angry tone.

“Soldiers,” he began hoarsely. “What have you done with the Eagle which
I entrusted to you?”

The colonel of the regiment replied that the Eagle-bearer had been
killed at Austerlitz in the _mêlée_ when the Russian cuirassiers
charged the regiment, and the Eagle had been lost in the tumult and
confusion of the moment. There was no survivor of those who had seen
the Eagle-bearer fall. The battalion, indeed, did not know of its loss
until some time later. One and all deeply deplored what had happened,
but they desired to inform His Majesty most respectfully that they,
single-handed, had captured two Austrian standards, and implored his
consideration on that account, begging that he would allow them to
receive a new Eagle in exchange.

The whole regiment supported the colonel’s request with loud shouts,
“réclama à grands cris.” But Napoleon’s countenance remained unchanged.

[Sidenote: SCATHING CENSURE AND BITTER SCORN]

He replied coldly and contemptuously: “These two foreign flags do not
return me my Eagle!” Then, after a pause, he launched out into words of
the severest censure and rebuke, telling the men that he had seen them
with his own eyes in flight at Austerlitz. He poured bitter scorn on
their conduct, “in phrases, stinging, burning, corrosive, which those
present remembered long afterwards--to the end of their lives.”

Again the unhappy colonel pleaded his hardest for his men. He entreated
the Emperor’s clemency, once more beseeching Napoleon to allow that
they had wiped out the slur on their good name, and to grant the
battalion a new Eagle.

Napoleon said nothing for a moment. Then he again addressed them in an
abrupt tone:

“Officers, sub-officers, and soldiers, swear to me here that not one of
you saw your Eagle fall. Assure me that if you had done so you would
have flung yourselves into the midst of the enemy to recover it, or
have died in the attempt. The soldier who loses his Eagle on the field
of battle loses his honour and his all.”

“We swear it!” came the reply at once.

At that there seemed to come a change in the Emperor’s mood. He paused
once more for a few moments, during which there was dead silence. Then
he raised his voice: “I will grant that you have not been cowards;
but you have been imprudent! Again I tell you that these Austrian
standards--even, indeed, were they six--would not compensate me for my
Eagle.”

He stopped short. He seemed to be musing for a moment, looking straight
into the eyes of the men. After that, with a curt “Well, I will restore
you yet another Eagle!” Napoleon turned his horse and rode on down the
line of troops.

[Sidenote: THEY FOUND THE OTHER EAGLE]

It was quite true, as the colonel told Napoleon, that the regiment
was unaware at the time that their Eagle had been lost. As a
fact, search-parties--practically all the survivors of the First
Battalion--were out on the day after Austerlitz hunting over the
battlefield among the dead for their lost Eagle. By the irony of fate
it was they who picked up and restored the Eagle of the 24th Light
Infantry to their fellows in adversity; the Russians, it would seem,
had not marked its fall in the confusion of the fighting. At any rate
it was left where it fell and where it was found.

There was, as it curiously happened, no reference in the Austerlitz
Bulletin published in France--the 30th “Bulletin of the Grand Army”--to
the loss of its Eagle by the 4th of the Line, although the disaster to
the battalion is reported. “Un bataillon du 4me de Ligne fut chargé
par la Garde Impériale Russe à Cheval et culbuté.” That was all that
was said on the subject. Yet, on other occasions later, when Eagles
were lost, mention was made of the misfortune in one or other of the
Bulletins, with, generally also, some remark by way of explaining away
the unpleasant fact, and now and then a caustic comment by Napoleon.
A picture connected with the incident was, however, painted--at whose
request is unknown. It is now in the national collection of military
pictures of the campaigns of Napoleon at Versailles. It shows the First
Battalion of the 4th of the Line at the Schönbrunn review “presenting
Napoleon with two Austrian standards taken by them from the enemy, and
claiming in exchange a new Eagle for themselves.”[10]

This closing word may be said of the spoils of the Eagles at Austerlitz.

[Sidenote: THE RECEPTION IN NOTRE DAME]

The forty-five flags captured in the battle, with five others selected
from those taken at Ulm, making fifty in all, were presented by
Napoleon to the Cathedral of Notre Dame. With the trophies he sent this
message: “Our intention is that every year on the 2nd of December a
Solemn Office shall be sung in the Cathedral in memory of the brave men
who fell on the great day.” The flags were borne in triumph, together
with the trophies of the Ulm campaign,--120 captured standards and
colours in all--through the streets of Paris on January 15, 1806, amid
a tremendous demonstration of popular enthusiasm. “The behaviour of
the people,” wrote Cambacérès, “resembled intoxication.” Four days
later the Austerlitz flags were received at Notre Dame by the assembled
Cathedral clergy, Cardinal du Belloy at their head, with elaborate
religious ceremonial.

Said the Cardinal-Archbishop of Paris in his address from the
Altar-steps: “These banners, suspended from the roof of our Cathedral,
will attest to posterity the efforts of Europe in arms against us;
the great achievements of our soldiers; the protection of Heaven over
France; the prodigious successes of our invincible Emperor; and the
homage which he pays to God for his victories.” Not one of the flags
exists now. They disappeared mysteriously, in circumstances to be
described later, in the early hours of March 31, 1814, the day on
which the victorious Allies entered Paris, and Napoleon withdrew to
Fontainebleau.

Fifty-four of the other trophies paraded through Paris, flags taken in
the Ulm campaign, were presented by Napoleon, as has been said, to
the Senate. In return a picture of the scene at the reception of the
trophy-flags was ordered to be painted for presentation to the Emperor.
It is now at Versailles.

The remaining sixteen trophies were divided by order of the Emperor.
Eight were sent to the Assembly Hall of the Tribunate; eight to the
Hôtel de Ville as a gift to the city of Paris.

Thus did France receive the first spoils of the Eagles.

“Soldiers,” said Napoleon to the Grand Army, in his Austerlitz
Proclamation; “I am satisfied with you. You have justified my fullest
expectations of your intrepidity. You have decorated your Eagles with
immortal glory!”




CHAPTER V

IN THE SECOND CAMPAIGN


JENA AND THE TRIUMPH OF BERLIN

The curtain rises this time on an act in the War Drama of the Eagles
unique in the startling incidents of its historic _dénoûment_.

Prussia, in September 1806, threw down the gage to Napoleon and drew
the sword for a trial of strength, with the full assurance of victory.
There was no doubt in Germany as to the issue; not the least anxiety
was felt. No troops in the world, declared one and all, could stand up
to the Prussian Army. It was easy, they said at Potsdam and Berlin, to
account for what had happened last year on the Danube. Any sort of army
could have won in that war. Timidity and want of skill in the Austrian
generals, deficient training in the men, had been, beyond dispute, the
reason of the disasters. It would be otherwise now. Napoleon would have
to meet this time the Army of Prussia; the best drilled and smartest
soldiers in the world, organised and trained under the system that the
Great Frederick had originated and himself brought to perfection.
“His Majesty the King,” said one of the Prussian generals, addressing
a parade at Potsdam, “has many generals better than Napoleon!” In the
Prussian Army, from veteran field-marshal to drummer-boy, there were
no two opinions as to what must be the outcome of a clash of arms with
France. The wings of Napoleon’s Eagles would be clipped once for all.

But to hurl defiant words was not enough. Yet further to display
contempt for their French foes, the young officers of the Prussian
Guard marched one night in procession through the streets of Berlin to
demonstrate in front of the French Embassy. Shouting out insults and
jeers, they brandished their swords before the windows of the mansion
and made a show of sharpening the blades on the Ambassador’s doorsteps.
The Prussian King’s ultimatum went forth, couched in language there was
no mistaking, and the Royal Guard Corps set out from the capital for
the frontier with flags displayed and their bands playing triumphal
airs, chanting songs of the victories of the Great Frederick, and
shouting themselves hoarse with cries of “Nach Paris!” All over Prussia
it was the same. The marching regiments tramped through the towns and
villages, their colours decked with flowers, their bands playing, and
with the swaggering gait of victors returning from conquest.

[Sidenote: A REPLY WITHIN A WEEK]

The Prussian ultimatum, delivered on September 1, haughtily demanded
a reply from France within a week. It was accepted with alacrity.
Napoleon had foreseen all and laid his plans. “Marshal,” he said to
Berthier, with a grim smile, as he read the ultimatum, “they have given
us a rendezvous for the 8th; never did Frenchman refuse such an appeal.”

The Eagles never swooped to more deadly purpose, with results more
amazing and more dramatic, than in that campaign.

Within three days of the firing of the first shot, a Prussian division
of 9,000 men had been routed with heavy loss at Schleitz in Thuringia;
and Murat’s cavalry had captured elsewhere great part of the Prussian
reserve baggage-trains and pontoon equipment. On the fourth day of the
war, at Saalfeld in Thuringia, 1,200 Prussian prisoners were taken and
30 guns. In the battles of Jena and Auerstadt, both fought on the same
day, October 14, 20,000 Prussian prisoners, 200 guns, and 25 standards
were spoils to the Eagles. At Erfurth, on the next day, a Prussian
field-marshal with 14,000 men, 120 guns and the whole of the grand
park of the reserve artillery of the army were taken. At Halle 4,000
Prussian prisoners were taken, with 30 guns; at Lübeck 8,000 prisoners
and 40 guns. Magdeburg, one of the strongest fortresses in Europe, with
immense magazines and 600 guns on the ramparts garrisoned by 16,000
troops, surrendered after a few hours’ partial bombardment. Stettin, a
first-class fortress mounting 150 guns, with a garrison of 6,000 men,
surrendered without firing a shot. The strong fortress of Cüstrin on
the Oder, with 4,000 men in garrison and 90 cannon on the ramparts,
surrendered, also without firing a shot, to a solitary French infantry
regiment with four guns. The fortress of Spandau, garrisoned by 6,000
men, hauled down its flag and opened its gates to a squadron of French
hussars, no other French troops being within many miles, bluffed into
surrender. Within twelve days of Jena, Napoleon had made his entry as a
conqueror into Berlin, and the Prussian Army had ceased to exist. “We
have arrived in Potsdam and Berlin,” announced Napoleon in a Bulletin
to the Grand Army, “sooner than the renown of our victories! We have
made 60,000 prisoners, taken 65 standards, including those of the Royal
Guard, 600 pieces of cannon, 3 fortresses, 20 generals, half of our
army having to regret that they have not had an opportunity of firing a
shot. All the Prussian provinces from the Elbe to the Oder are in our
hands.” Before the end of the year, in little more than three months
from the firing of the first shot, a total of 100,000 prisoners, 4,000
cannon, 6 first-class fortresses, and many smaller ones, were in the
hands of the victors.

[Sidenote: RUIN, SWIFT AND IRREPARABLE]

Never had the world witnessed such an overthrow in war, so complete
and appalling a catastrophe. Two battles sufficed to prostrate Prussia
and annihilate the model army of Frederick the Great: the twin battles
of Jena and Auerstadt, both fought, as has been said, on the same
day, October 14, and within ten miles of one another. Jena was fought
under Napoleon’s own eye; Auerstadt by Marshal Davout, practically
single-handed, with his one army corps confronting the King and
Blücher with the main Prussian army. The Prussian generals indeed
gave themselves into Napoleon’s hands at the outset. They separated
their main army into two bodies out of touch with each other, in the
immediate presence of the enemy. Ruin, swift and irreparable, was the
penalty. At Jena, Prince Hohenlohe’s army was flung roughly back and
dashed to pieces, its scattered remnants flying in wild disorder. At
Auerstadt, Davout defeated numbers nearly double his own, through the
confused tactics of the Prussian generals. Immediately after that
came on the _débâcle_. The Prussian Auerstadt army was falling back,
disheartened and demoralised, but still in fair military formation to
a large extent, when, all of a sudden, not having had up to then the
least inkling of what had happened at Jena, the retreating troops came
upon the shattered fragments of Hohenlohe’s battalions, streaming in
wild confusion across their path; masses of fugitives running for
their lives in frantic panic before the sabres of Murat’s pursuing
cavalry. That ended everything for the Prussian army in five minutes.
The sight of their fugitive comrades struck confusion and sheer fright
into the retreating columns from Auerstadt. All order was instantly
lost: the soldiers threw away their arms and spread over the country in
headlong rout. And there was no means of stopping it. In their blind
self-confidence the Prussian generals had made no arrangements in
the event of a reverse. No line of retreat had been arranged for, no
rallying-point had been thought of. “The disaster of a single day made
an end of the Prussian army as a force capable of meeting the enemy in
the field.”

For the Eagles it was a day of adventures on both battlefields. Swiftly
alternating rushes forward, the Eagles showing the way at the head
of their regiments at one moment; hasty halts to form in rallying
squares, the Eagles in the midst, the next moment, to check the
incessant Prussian cavalry counter-charges--that was what the fighting
on the French side was like, all through the day, at both Jena and
Auerstadt. At one time the Eagles were leading forward charging lines
of exultantly cheering men, firing fast and racing forward at the _pas
de charge_; immediately afterwards they were standing fast, each the
centre of a mass of breathless and excited soldiers, surging round and
closing up to form square, with bristling bayonets levelled on every
side, to hold the ground they had won against the charging squadrons of
Prussian horsemen that came at them, thundering down impetuously at the
gallop.

[Sidenote: “LEAD OUT YOUR EAGLE!”]

“I want to see the Eagles well to the front to-day!” said Napoleon
to several regiments in turn, as he rode at early dawn along the
lines of Marshal Soult’s two foremost divisions who were to open the
attack at Jena. To them the task had been appointed to push forward
in advance, and hold the exits from the narrow defiles through which
the French troops had to pass, before reaching the Prussians on the
high ground beyond, in order to give time to the main army, following
close in rear, to deploy and form in battle order. “Lead out your
Eagle, Sixty-fourth!” Napoleon said to one of the regiments told off
to go forward in the forefront of all. “I wish to-day to see the Eagle
of the Sixty-fourth lead the battle on the field of honour!” How that
Eagle led its regiment, how those who fought under it did their duty,
the prized honour of special mention in the Jena Bulletin of the Grand
Army, and a shower of crosses of the Legion of Honour, distributed
among all ranks, bore testimony. Five times did the Eagle of the 34th,
the regiment fighting next to the 64th, lead a charge, each charge
crossing bayonets with the enemy, twice in hand-to-hand fight with the
picked corps of the Prussian Grenadiers.

It was on the battlefield of Jena that Marshal Ney won his historic
sobriquet of “The Bravest of the Brave.” He personally led forward his
attack, with, at either side of him, the Eagles of the 18th of the
Line, the 32nd, and the 96th. Carried away by his impetuous valour,
soon after the opening of the battle, Ney made his attack with only at
hand the three regiments of his First Division. The other two divisions
of Ney’s corps had not yet reached the field. A regiment of cuirassiers
headed the column, and at their first charge captured 13 Prussian guns;
but the Prussian cavalry, charging back at once to recover the guns,
overpowered the cuirassiers.

“The Prussian cavalry broke the French horse, and enveloped the
infantry in such numbers as would inevitably have proved fatal to
less resolute troops; but the brave marshal instantly formed his men
into squares, threw himself into one of them, and there maintained
the combat by a rolling fire on all sides, till Napoleon, who saw his
danger, sent several regiments of horse, under Bertrand, who disengaged
him from his perilous situation.”

Ney’s other troops then joined the marshal, coming up with their Eagles
gleaming through the battle-smoke: the Eagles of the 39th and the
69th, of the 76th, the 27th, and the 59th. Ney, extricated from his
difficulties, went on again at once. “With intrepid step he ascended
the hill, and, after a sharp conflict, stormed the important village
of Vierzehn-Heiligen, in the centre of the Prussian position. In vain
Hohenlohe formed the flower of his troops to regain the post; in
vain these brave men advanced in parade order, and with unshrinking
firmness, through a storm of musketry and grape; the troops of Lannes
came up to Ney’s support, and the French established themselves in such
strength in the village as to render all subsequent attempts for its
recapture abortive.”

[Sidenote: LET THEM COME ON!]

This was the spirit in which, at Jena, Ney’s men fought under the
Eagles. One instance will suffice. The 76th of the Line, after the
village of Vierzehn-Heiligen had been taken, were in the act of
advancing across the open to a fresh attack, when a charge of Prussian
cavalry swept fiercely down on them. The regiment formed in square,
each battalion rallying round its Eagle, held up aloft for all to
gather round. The Prussians had come up suddenly. They were within
150 yards before the 76th were ready. Then the 76th were ordered to
“present” and fire. Instead of doing that, the men, as if moved by one
common impulse, took off their shakos, stuck them on their bayonets,
and waved them in the air, with defiant cheers of “Vive l’Empereur!”
“Donnez feu, mes enfants! Donnez feu!” (“Fire, men, fire!”) shouted out
their colonel, Lannier, anxious lest the enemy should get too near.
“We have time: at fifteen paces, Colonel; wait and see!” came back in
answer from the ranks. They did wait, and, at just fifteen paces, fired
a crashing volley which so staggered the Prussians that, leaving half
their men on the ground, they turned and galloped back.

The regiments of Lannes’ corps, with the fiery marshal cantering at
their head and waving them on, cocked hat in hand, entered the battle
with drums beating and the Eagles proudly displayed in the centre of
the leading lines.

[Sidenote: “HERE IS THE COU-COU!”]

One regiment lost 28 officers and 400 men. It had made good its first
attack and was advancing to a second, when it was charged in the open
by the Prussian cavalry, while in the act of forming square. It all
but lost its Eagle. The Eagle-bearer was cut down, and the Eagle was
broken from its staff in the trampling tumult of horsemen intermingled
with infantry, savagely fighting with their bayonets. A soldier saved
the Eagle, and in the hurry of the moment stuffed it into the pocket
of his long overcoat. Then he went on fighting. Apparently the man had
no time or opportunity to think of the Eagle again. The regiment was
re-forming towards the close of the battle, when Napoleon himself,
riding across the ground near them, with his quick glance, missed the
Eagle. He cantered up to the spot, and, on being told by an officer
that he did not know where it was, angrily accused the men of having
lost their Eagle on the field. He began upbraiding them indignantly:
“What is this? Where is your Eagle? You have brought disgrace on the
Army by losing your Eagle!” Those were his opening words. He was rating
the men angrily, when he was abruptly interrupted by a voice from the
ranks. “No, your Majesty, no! they did not get it: they only got a
piece of the bâton! Here is the Cou-cou! I put it in my pocket!” The
soldier drew out the Eagle as he spoke and held it up. There was a
loud outburst of laughter from the soldiers at the unexpected turn of
events, amid which Napoleon, without a word more, turned and rode off
elsewhere.

At Auerstadt, where 30,000 French faced and defeated 60,000 Prussians,
the fighting was even fiercer than at Jena. Recklessly the Prussian
horsemen, led in person by the dauntless Blücher, repeatedly charged
down on the French, who formed in square everywhere to beat them back,
They did so at all points, and the Prussians only wrecked themselves
beyond recovery by their efforts. In vain did the Prussian cavalry, as
at Jena, gallop up to the French bayonets again and again. “In vain
these gallant cavaliers, with headlong fury, drove their steeds up to
the very muzzles of the French muskets. In vain they rode round and
enveloped their squares: ceaseless was the rolling fire which issued
from those flaming walls: impenetrable the hedge of bayonets which, the
front rank kneeling, presented to their advances.” Erect in the centre
of each French battalion square glittered its Eagle, raised on high
defiantly above the smoke as the volleys flashed out all round.

Marshal Davout was seen at every point wherever the regiments were
hardest pressed. From square to square the marshal galloped, as
opportunity offered in the intervals of the Prussian attacks, “his face
begrimed with sweat and powder-smoke, his spectacles gone,[11] his bald
head bleeding from a wound, his uniform torn, a piece of his cocked hat
shot away,” to exhort the men to stand fast and hold their ground. To
one regiment he called out, as he reined up beside its square: “Their
Great Frederick said that God gave the victory to the big battalions.
He lied! It’s the stubborn soldiers who win battles; that’s you and
your general to-day!” Davout personally brought up support at one
point to rescue a sorely pressed division of four regiments, General
Gudin’s,[12] holding the village of Herrenhausen, on the right of the
battlefield; a post of vital importance to the fate of the day. Taken
by a brilliant dash forward early in the battle, the village was held
to the last, in spite of the utmost endeavours of the Prussians to
regain it.

[Illustration: MARSHAL DAVOUT.]

[Sidenote: AT BAY BEHIND A BARRICADE]

The French kept the post at the cost of half their numbers. One
regiment, the 85th, on the side of the village fronting the Prussians,
lost two-thirds of its men and was forced back and compelled to abandon
the outskirts. It kept the Prussians at bay, however, within the
village, behind a barricade of overturned carts, farm implements, and
cottage furniture heaped together. Close behind the firing line across
the village street the Eagle-bearer took his stand, amidst a hail of
bullets, mounted on a wheelbarrow and brandishing the Eagle and calling
on the men to stand firm and fire low.

Marshal Davout brought up his First Division of five regiments to
rescue Gudin, heading them sword in hand as he galloped forward. In
doing so he received his wound and had a narrow escape of his life.
“One bullet went through the marshal’s hat just above the cockade.”[13]

The 111th of the Line, of Davout’s Third Division, had three
Eagle-bearers shot down in succession, a fresh officer coming forward
to carry the Eagle as his predecessor fell. All the drummer-lads of the
regiment were killed, whereupon Drum-Major Mauser, dropping his staff,
picked up a drum and beat it as the regiment advanced in its final
charge. He ran forward close beside the Eagle until he in turn fell
shot dead. This was in storming the village of Spielberg, nearly at
the close of the battle.

“The corps of Marshal Davout performed prodigies,” wrote Napoleon in
the Fourth Bulletin of the campaign, commending with warmth “the rare
intrepidity of the brave corps.” He ordered 500 crosses of the Legion
of Honour to be distributed in Davout’s corps, directing that when the
army reached Berlin, Davout and the Third Corps should take precedence,
and their Eagles lead the triumphal entry through the streets of the
Prussian capital. At a special review of Davout’s corps, calling
the marshal and his generals round him, he declared his unbounded
admiration of the feat of arms they had achieved. “Sire,” replied
Davout, deeply moved at Napoleon’s words, “the soldiers of the Third
Corps will always be to you what the Tenth Legion was to Caesar.”

At the attack on Halle, three days after Jena, the 32nd of the Line,
near the Eagle of which regiment Ney had ridden at Jena, distinguished
themselves brilliantly. The Prussian Reserve Army Corps was holding
Halle and making a gallant effort in a rearguard fight to safeguard
the passage there over the river Saale. Led by the commander of Ney’s
First Division, General Dupont, in person, they stormed the bridge in
the face of a tremendous fire of grape and case shot. Then, backed up
by their comrades in Ney’s First Division, the 18th and 96th and 9th
Light Infantry, they fought their way through the city and, breaking
open the gates, stormed the heights beyond, foremost throughout in the
attack. Four times the Eagle-bearer of the 32nd was shot down: each
time a fresh officer sprang forward to lead the regiment on. The 97th
of the Line, while fighting their way through the streets of Halle at
another point, found the Prussian cannon mounted at a barricade too
deadly to face in the open, and the regiment recoiled in confusion.
Taking the Eagle from the Eagle-bearer, Colonel Barrois called forward
the grenadier company. Leading them on himself on horseback, holding up
the Eagle with his right hand, he went straight at the barricade, which
was stormed without touching a trigger.

[Sidenote: ACROSS A CONQUERED LAND]

Thenceforward there was only left for the Eagles to choose the slain;
to parade in triumph across a conquered land. “Veni, Vidi, Vici,”
sums up the story of the after-events of the war for the Eagles of
Napoleon. The army of the great Frederick committed suicide after Jena.
Its resistance collapsed: the army that had gone forth in September
to cross the Rhine and dictate peace at the gates of Paris had ceased
to exist within six weeks. How completely indeed the _moral_ of the
Prussians had been shattered, this story, from a report from Marshal
Lannes to Napoleon, serves to show. “Three hussars,” related Lannes,
“having lost their way towards Grätz, found themselves in the midst of
an enemy’s squadron. They boldly drew their carbines and, levelling
them at the enemy, called out that the Prussians were surrounded, and
must surrender at discretion. The Prussians obeyed. The commander of
the squadron, without apparently a thought of resistance, ordered
his men to dismount, and they surrendered their arms to those three
hussars, who brought them all in prisoners of war.”

General Lassalle, with a handful of hussars, as has been said,
captured the fortress of Stettin, with 150 guns on its walls and a
garrison of 6,000 men, by sheer effrontery. He rode up to the main
gate and demanded the surrender within five minutes; and the governor
capitulated on the spot. “If your hussars take strong fortresses like
that,” wrote Napoleon to Murat, on hearing the news, “I have nothing
to do but break up my artillery and discharge my engineers.” Prince
Hohenlohe with 14,000 men and 50 guns, his troops including the Royal
Prussian Guard and six regiments of Guard cavalry, laid down their
arms at Prentzlau. A few miles away, 8,000 more Prussians surrendered
on the same day to a French brigade of dragoons. The unfortunates
were remnants of the troops beaten at Jena, and had been relentlessly
pursued for ten days.

The 7th Hussars forwarded to Napoleon as their spoils from a three
days’ chase, 7 Prussian cavalry standards; those of the Anspach and
Bayreuth Dragoons; the Queen of Prussia’s regiment; and 4 standards
of the Light Cavalry of the Guard. Marshal Lannes sent Napoleon 40
Prussian standards taken between Jena and Berlin. Bernadotte and Soult
presented 82 more trophies, the spoils of Blücher’s army, forced to
surrender at Lübeck after a forlorn-hope fight in the course of which
the city was stormed.

[Sidenote: “THE FINEST FEAT OF ARMS”]

Marshal Ney took the fortress of Magdeburg without having a single
siege-gun, and with only 11,000 men at hand to deal with 24,000 in the
garrison and 700 guns on the ramparts, some of these being the heaviest
artillery of the time. It was perhaps the most surprising event of the
war. The taking of Magdeburg, wrote Junot, “is the finest feat of arms
that has illustrated this campaign.” Ney had been ordered to blockade
Magdeburg until a sufficient army was available for the siege of the
fortress, which Napoleon expected would be a long and difficult affair.
But so tedious a task as a blockade was not at all to Ney’s taste.
To hasten matters he sent for half a dozen mortars, taken at Erfurt,
and began throwing shells into the suburbs on the side nearest him.
The bombardment caused a scare among the townsfolk. Panic-stricken at
seeing their houses set on fire and destroyed by the bursting shells,
they hastened to General Kleist, the governor of Magdeburg, an elderly
and nervous old gentleman of between seventy and eighty years of
age, and implored him to ask terms of the French marshal. Dismayed
himself at the prospect of a siege, with disorder rampant among the
military--nearly half the garrison was made up of fragments of fugitive
regiments from Jena who had fled to Magdeburg for shelter from the
pursuing French--Kleist, losing his nerve in the face of the alarming
situation, agreed to negotiate for terms. Ney’s reply was a demand for
instant surrender, whereupon the wretched governor, although he had
more than enough good troops at disposal, without counting the Jena
fugitives, to have made a stubborn defence, tamely hoisted the white
flag.

The march out of the garrison of Magdeburg was a repetition of the
Austrian humiliation of Ulm on a lesser scale. The standards of the
Black Eagle in their turn had at Magdeburg publicly to acknowledge
defeat before the Eagles of Napoleon.

[Sidenote: THE GARRISON LAYS DOWN ARMS]

Ney drew up his 11,000 men in a great hollow square outside the Ulrich
gate of the fortress. His troops were drawn up along three sides of
the square; the fourth side, that nearest the city, being left open.
In front of the regiments stood their Eagles, all paraded as at Ulm,
the Eagle-guards beside them, and the regimental officers standing in
line with their swords at the carry. The Prussians marched out and, to
the music of the French bands, passed in procession along the three
inner sides of the square, and in front of Marshal Ney and his staff.
The miserable Kleist led them, and then took his stand beside Ney, to
answer the marshal’s questions as to who and what the various regiments
were, as each set of downcast Prussians trailed past. They tramped by,
with their muskets on their shoulders unloaded and without bayonets,
and with their colours furled. The hapless prisoners, after they had
defiled past, were at once marched away under escort on the road to
Mayence. Twenty generals, 800 other officers, 22,000 infantry, and
2,000 artillerymen, with 59 standards, underwent the humiliation of the
defilade.[14] There were several painful scenes at the laying down of
the arms. “Their soldiers openly insulted their officers,” describes
one of the French lookers-on. “Most of them looked terribly ashamed of
themselves; the faces of not a few were streaming with tears.”

At Magdeburg, as in the other surrenders elsewhere, it was not the
personal courage of the officers and soldiers that was wanting--there
were men by thousands in the various garrisons ready to give their
lives for the honour of their country; it was the generals in command
whose nerve lacked. The generals were men past their prime, and mostly
physically incapable of enduring hardships. They had been appointed to
their posts, in accordance with the system in vogue in Prussia, for the
sake of the emoluments.

“The overthrow of Jena,” to use the words of a modern writer, “had been
caused by faults of generalship, and cast no stain upon the courage
of the officers; the surrender of the Prussian fortresses, which
began on the day when the French entered Berlin, attached the utmost
personal disgrace to their commanders. Even after the destruction of
the army in the field, Prussia’s situation would not have been hopeless
if the commanders of the fortresses had acted on the ordinary rules
of military duty. Magdeburg and the strongholds upon the Oder were
sufficiently armed and provisioned to detain the entire French army,
and to give time to the King to collect upon the Vistula a force as
numerous as that which he had lost. But whatever is weakest in human
nature--old age, fear, and credulity--seemed to have been placed at the
head of the Prussian defences.” Küstrin on the Oder, “in full order for
a long siege, was surrendered by the older officers, amidst the curses
of the subalterns and the common soldiers: the artillerymen had to be
dragged from their guns by force.”

At Magdeburg, indeed, before the march out, the younger officers of the
garrison mobbed General Kleist, hooting at him and cursing him to his
face; some of them, further, being with difficulty stopped from acts of
personal violence.

There yet remained one day more for the Eagles. The triumphal parade of
the victorious Eagles through Berlin was the crowning humiliation that
Napoleon imposed on vanquished Prussia.

[Sidenote: MARSHAL DAVOUT IN BERLIN]

Davout’s corps, as Napoleon had promised, marched through the Prussian
capital first of all. The marshal was waited on as he entered by the
Burgomeister and civic authorities, humbly bowing before him, and
offering in token of submission the keys of Berlin. The offer, however,
was declined. “You must present them later,” was the reply; “they
belong to a greater than I!” After marching through Berlin, Davout
camped a mile beyond the city, posting his artillery “in position as
for war, pointed towards the place as in readiness to bombard it.” The
soldiers were then allowed to go about Berlin in parties. They behaved
very quietly, and made eager sightseers, we are told. The shops,
which had been closed during the march through, reopened later, and
the people went about the streets as usual, “mortified and subdued in
demeanour, but apparently very curious to see what they could of the
French officers.”

Augereau’s corps, and then those of Soult, Bernadotte, and Ney made
their triumphal entry and march through Berlin in turn, on different
days later on, bands playing and Eagles displayed at the head of the
regiments--the people turning out on each occasion in crowds to line
the streets and gaze at the show, “expressing great surprise at the
small size of our men and the youth of most of the officers.” Marshal
Ney’s corps brought with them their fifty-nine trophies from Magdeburg,
and, after parading them through the streets of Berlin, ceremoniously
presented them to Napoleon in public, in front of the statue of
Frederick the Great.

Napoleon himself made his triumphal entry into Berlin on October 28,
three days after Davout’s march through. He rode from Charlottenburg
through the Brandenburg Gate and along Unter-den-Linden to the Royal
Palace, at the head of the Old Guard and six thousand cuirassiers in
gleaming mail. Squadrons of Gendarmerie d’Elite and Chasseurs of the
Guard and the Horse Grenadiers, in their huge bear-skins, led the long
procession, all in _grande tenue_, with their bands playing and the
Eagles glittering in the brilliant sunshine of a perfect autumn day.

Napoleon came next, “riding by himself, twenty paces in front of the
staff, with impassive face and a stern expression,” passing amid dense
silent crowds, “the men all wearing black, as in mourning; the women
mostly with handkerchiefs to their eyes.” The people lined both sides
of the roadway, and filled the windows of all the houses overlooking
the route. All Berlin, young and old, was in the streets that day,
staring at the spectacle in mute silence, looking on dumbly, pale-faced
and miserable of aspect. Not a mutter of abuse was heard, not the least
sign was apparent of the deadly hatred to their conqueror that one and
all felt. With rage and despair in their hearts, with compressed lips
and clenched fists at their sides, the men watched the splendid array
sweep proudly past them in all the insolent pomp of victorious war.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON RIDES THROUGH]

For once, on that historic occasion, Napoleon discarded his customary
wear of the green undress uniform of his pet corps, the Chasseurs of
the Guard. He entered Berlin as the head of a conquering army, wearing
the full-dress uniform of a French general, crimson plumed cocked hat
with blue and white aigrette, blue coat heavily embroidered with gold,
and with glittering bullion epaulettes, and the blue and gold sash of
a general round his waist. Four marshals, Berthier, Lannes, Davout,
and Augereau, riding abreast, followed Napoleon, immediately in front
of the Imperial Staff, a cavalcade of a hundred and more brilliantly
decorated officers, all in their most gorgeous parade uniforms, in
celebration of the day. The keys of the city were presented to the
conqueror, and accepted by him, as Napoleon passed through the
Brandenburg Gate. Ten thousand infantry of the Old Guard, in a vast
solid column of glistening bayonets, marched, twenty abreast, in rear
of the staff. Their famous band playing triumphantly, with the Eagle
of the Grenadiers of the Old Guard above its flag of crimson silk
and gold, heading the veterans. They also were all in the full-dress
uniform they wore on gala-day parades before the Tuileries. By
Napoleon’s special order, the Old Guard on all campaigns carried in
their knapsacks their full-dress uniform, specially for donning on
occasions such as that at Berlin.

But the cup of humiliation for the miserable citizens of the Prussian
capital was not yet full. They had yet another military spectacle with
a significance of its own to witness; one the deep humiliation of which
they felt more bitterly even than Napoleon’s triumphant ride in person
through their streets. The citizens of Berlin had to look on their own
officers of the Royal Prussian Guard being led in procession through
their midst under the armed escort of Napoleon’s grenadiers. That was
Napoleon’s way of settling accounts for that August night of wanton
insult to France, for the sharpening of the sword-blades on the steps
of the French Embassy.

[Sidenote: THE PRISONERS FARMED OUT]

Nor, too, did Napoleon spare the Prussian prisoners of the rank and
file. Writing from Berlin to the Minister of the Interior in Paris,
he gave directions that the Prussian captives should be made use of
as hewers of wood and drawers of water for their conquerors. They
were to be farmed out to municipalities and district councils in the
Departments. “Their services should be turned to account at a trifling
expense in the way of wages for the benefit of our manufacturers and
cultivators and replace our conscripts called to serve in the ranks of
the Grand Army.”

Napoleon stayed in Berlin for four weeks, while the marshals were
leading the Eagles through Eastern Prussia towards the Polish frontier.
Russia had taken up the cause of her defeated neighbour, and the armies
of the Czar were on the move to rescue what was left of the Prussian
army. Less than 15,000 men were all that remained in the field to show
fight, of 200,000 soldiers who, not two months before, had been on the
march against France in full anticipation of victory.

In the Royal Palace of Berlin Napoleon received with elaborate
ceremony the deputation of the French Senate sent from Paris specially
to congratulate the victor of Jena in the enemy’s capital. He took
advantage of the unique occasion for the formal presentation and
handing over to their charge, for conveyance to Paris, of the trophies
of the war--340 Prussian battle-flags and standards.[15] Forty of the
trophies presented to the Senate on that day at Berlin are now among
the array of trophies grouped round Napoleon’s tomb in the Invalides.

Napoleon handed over to the charge of the deputation at the same time,
for transfer to the Invalides, his own personal spoil--the sword of
Frederick the Great. It was removed--all the world knows the story of
the unpardonable outrage--by Napoleon’s own hand from its resting-place
on the royal tomb at Potsdam. “I would rather have this,” he said to
the officers beside him in the royal vault as he took possession of the
sword, “than twenty millions. I shall send it to my old soldiers who
fought against Frederick in the campaign in Hanover. I will present it
to the Governor of the Invalides, who will guard it as a testimonial of
the victories of the Grand Army and the vengeance that it has wreaked
for the disaster of Rosbach. My veterans will be pleased to see the
sword of the man who defeated them at Rosbach!”

[Sidenote: FREDERICK THE GREAT’S SWORD]

The trophies started for France forthwith under military escort, and
Paris went mad with exultation at the sight of them. On the day of the
State Procession which escorted the trophies from the Tuileries to
the Invalides it proved almost impossible to keep back the enormous
crowds that thronged the streets along the route, in spite of cordons
of gendarmerie and regiments of dragoons. Deputations of veterans and
National Guards, with the Eagles of the Departmental Legions, led the
way. Then came Imperial carriages with exalted official personages.
The trophies had their place next, displayed in clusters of flags all
round a gigantic triumphal car. Marshal Moncey, the acting Governor
of Paris, rode a few paces behind the car of Prussian standards,
holding up the trophy of trophies before the eyes of the wildly
cheering onlookers--Frederick the Great’s sword. A gaily attired
train of generals and staff officers attended the marshal. The rear
of the procession was brought up by the battalions of the Guard of
Paris, their Eagles being borne amid rows of gleaming bayonets. Salvos
of artillery from the Triumphal Battery greeted the arrival of the
trophies at the Invalides, where the veterans awaited them, drawn up on
parade before the Gate of Honour. As Napoleon had specially directed,
the Hanoverian War veterans of the Invalides met and escorted Marshal
Moncey to the chapel at the head of other specially nominated veterans,
who bore, marching in procession, the Prussian trophy-standards. The
trophies were deposited with an elaborate display of ceremonial in
front of the High Altar, after which Fontanes, the Public Orator of
the Empire, delivered an address full of glowingly eloquent passages
on the glorious achievements of the Grand Army and the “resplendent
magnificence of the leader who had led the Eagles to surpassing
triumphs!”


THE TWELVE LOST EAGLES OF EYLAU

Napoleon passed from the victorious fields of Prussia to the rough
experiences of the Eylau and Friedland campaigns, which followed as the
sequel to Jena on the plains of the Polish frontier. The Eagles there
had to undergo under fire vicissitudes of fortune that were a foretaste
of the fate in store for some of them later on, at the hands of the
same enemy, in the Moscow campaign. No fewer than fourteen of the
Eagles borne in triumph through Berlin after Jena were on view within a
twelvemonth as spoils of war in the Kazan Cathedral at St. Petersburg.

The Eagle of Marshal Ney’s favourite regiment in the battle-days
of the Ulm campaign, the 9th Light Infantry, was the first to meet
adventures in the Polish War. It was on the occasion of the surprise
of Bernadotte’s army corps, at Möhringen near the Vistula, in the last
week of January 1807. The Grand Army was lying in winter quarters to
the north of Warsaw, awaiting the reopening of the campaign in the
early spring, when the Russian army, breaking up unexpectedly from its
cantonments beyond the Vistula in the depth of winter, made a dash at
Bernadotte’s outlying troops, posted by themselves at some distance
from the main army and scattered in detachments over a wide tract of
country for reasons of food-supply. Bernadotte only got news of the
enemy’s approach just in time; practically at the eleventh hour. He
was rapidly concentrating his corps at Möhringen, but barely half his
troops had been able to reach the point of danger when the Russians
struck their blow. He was able with the troops nearest at hand to avert
destruction, but the escape was a narrow one and his losses were very
heavy, all his baggage falling into the hands of the enemy. Fortunately
for the French the Russian advanced guard attacked prematurely and was
beaten back, after which Bernadotte made good his retreat to a safer
neighbourhood.

[Sidenote: FOUR TIMES TAKEN AND RETAKEN]

The 9th Light Infantry were in the forefront of the fighting, which
was at the closest quarters, the soldiers on both sides meeting man
to man. Four Eagle-bearers of the 9th fell, one after the other. Four
times the Eagle was taken by the Russians and recaptured at the point
of the bayonet. A fifth time the Eagle-bearer went down, and on his
fall this time the Eagle disappeared, while the 9th were driven back,
broken and in disorder. They were quickly rallied again, however, and
led once more to the charge, “going forward to the combat with the
fury of despair.” This time their impetuous onset forced the Russians
to give ground. Advancing with shouts of victory, they stormed the
village of Psarrefelden, immediately in front of them, and there
seized part of a Russian ammunition train. While searching for fresh
cartridges in one of the enemy’s ammunition wagons to replenish their
empty cartouche-boxes an officer, to his surprise, came upon the lost
Eagle. It had been broken from its staff in the last fight round it,
and its Russian captor, probably having enough to do to look after
himself without carrying it about, had apparently thrust it hastily
into the ammunition wagon on top of the cartridges. At any rate there
the Eagle of the 9th Light Infantry was found, and so it was regained.
The broken staff and flag were missing and were never seen again, but
the all-important Eagle had been recovered. It was hurriedly mounted on
a hop-pole, found leaning against a peasant’s hut near by, which was
improvised for a staff, and on that the Eagle was carried to the close
of the fighting that day, after which the 9th retreated with the rest
of Bernadotte’s corps.

Napoleon specially decorated the lieutenant who recovered the Eagle,
and who also had led more than one of the charges to rescue it in the
earlier fighting. He gave him the cross of the Legion of Honour with
a money grant. He further recorded the recovery of the Eagle--though
without mentioning how it was got back--in the 55th Bulletin of the
Grand Army, dated Warsaw, January 29, 1807:

“The Eagle of the 9th Light Infantry was taken by the enemy, but,
realising the deep disgrace with which their brave regiment would be
covered for ever, and from which neither victory nor the glory acquired
in a hundred combats could have removed the stigma, the soldiers,
animated with an inconceivable ardour, precipitated themselves on the
enemy and routed them and recovered their Eagle.”

So Napoleon wrote history.

[Sidenote: ON THE FIRST DAY AT EYLAU]

Two Eagles met their fate in the first day’s fighting at Eylau--in the
preliminary combat on February 7, which formed the opening phase of the
terrific encounter next day. At Eylau--a small township some twenty-two
miles to the south of Königsburg--Napoleon in person commanded with
80,000 men in the field, and met with his first serious check in a
European war. In following up the Russian rearguard on the afternoon of
the 7th, as it fell slowly back to rejoin its main body, drawn up in
position on the farther side of Eylau, on ground chosen beforehand by
the Russian leader for making a stand, two of Napoleon’s battalions,
while pressing hotly forward after the enemy over the open plain,
some two miles from Eylau, were overpowered and cut to pieces. They
had charged and were driving in the nearest Russians to them, when a
Russian cavalry regiment, the St. Petersburg Dragoons, unexpectedly
came on the scene. Sweeping round amidst the tumult of the fighting,
the dragoons rode into them on the flank. The two battalions were
slaughtered almost to a man within five minutes, before help could
get to them, and their Eagles were snatched up and borne away. It was
an act of expiation for the St. Petersburg Dragoons. On the previous
day Murat’s pursuing hussars had charged and broken them, putting
them to flight, and in a wild panic they had ridden over one of their
own regiments, trampling their comrades down, with loss of life. To
retrieve their character the St. Petersburg Dragoons now went savagely
at the two French battalions, riding them down with reckless daring and
relentless fury, giving no quarter. Their capture of two of Napoleon’s
Eagles in one charge, the taking of two Eagles by a single regiment,
stands on its own account as a unique achievement.

[Illustration: Sketch Plan of the Battlefield of EYLAU]

Eylau--the historic battle of February 8, 1807--was fought in the depth
of winter; in the midst of a flat expanse of a desolate snow-plain
and ice-bound marshes; under dreary lowering skies of leaden grey;
amid howling gusts of piercing wind, with driving snow-storms sweeping
intermittently across the field of battle. A hundred and fifty thousand
men on both sides faced each other at the break of day, after passing
the night with their outposts within shot of one another, the soldiers
all lying in an open bivouac on the snow, round their watch-fires,
wrapped up in their cloaks, the only shelter from the bitter cold. They
fronted each other in the grey dawn “within half-cannon shot, their
immense masses distributed in dense columns over a space in breadth
less than four miles. Between them lay the field of battle, a wide
stretch of unenclosed ground, rising on the Russian side to a range
of small hills. All over the plain, ponds and marshes intersected the
ground, but far and wide all was now covered over with ice and deep
snow.”

Napoleon began the battle with a fierce cannonade, opening a terrific
fire all along the line with no fewer than 350 guns. The Russians
replied at once, firing back even more furiously and with yet more
guns. For almost an hour nearly 800 cannon belched forth shot and shell
on either side; an artillery duel perhaps unparalleled in war. Then, in
the midst of the cannonade, Napoleon launched his first attack. Fifteen
thousand men of Augereau’s corps moved out from the centre of the
French line to storm the Russian position. They went forward, massed in
two immense columns, with, in support, a third column of one of Soult’s
divisions.

[Sidenote: GOING FORWARD TO THEIR DOOM]

They went forward to their doom: to meet disaster, swift, terrible,
overwhelming, and to leave two of their Eagles in the hands of the
enemy as mementos of their fate. Yet they were not given up; neither
of those Eagles was surrendered. They remained on the field amid the
dead; left behind because there was not a man living of their regiments
to defend them. They lay where they fell, surrounded by the soldiers
who had died in their defence; lying on the snow for the Cossacks to
pick up and carry away. They were the Eagles of the 14th and the 24th
of the Line.

The Russians turned their guns on Augereau’s corps directly it
commenced its advance; it was sheer massacre for the French, as the
fierce tornado of cannon-balls crashed into the thick of the densely
massed columns. Whole companies were swept away, mowed down, on every
side. “Within a quarter of an hour, half of the corps were struck
down.” The rest, though, with stolid endurance, held firmly on their
way. The soldiers went doggedly on; only halting for a moment now and
again to close up their shattered ranks. At that moment, as they were
nearing the Russian position, a furious snow-storm burst over the
battlefield, the snow blowing right in the faces of the French. “It
was impossible,” one of the survivors told, “to see anything at all in
front; we could at times barely see a foot before us.” All, in spite
of that, however, laboured bravely to get forward; without wavering,
and regardless of the merciless fire of the Russian guns, which never
ceased for one moment.

[Sidenote: OVERWHELMED IN A SNOWSTORM]

Then, as the snow-blinded soldiers struggled on, when the storm of
whirling snow was at its worst, all in an instant the catastrophe
happened. Without warning, coming from nowhere, as it seemed, an
enormous mass of Russian horse, dragoons and Cossacks, charged
suddenly, amid an infernal din of furious shouting, into them. “So
thick was the snow-storm, and so unexpected the onset, that the
assailants were only a few feet off, and the long lances of the
Cossacks almost touching the French infantry when they were first
discerned.” The Russians swept down on all sides of the two divisions;
charging them in front and flanks and rear at once, the dragoons
sabring them right and left, the Cossacks stabbing at them with their
long eighteen-foot lances.

“The combat was not of more than a few minutes’ duration; the corps,
charged at once by foot and horse with the utmost vigour, broke and
fled in the wildest disorder back into Eylau, closely pursued by the
Russian cavalry and Cossacks, who made such havoc, that the whole,
above 15,000 strong, were, with the exception of 1,500 men, taken or
destroyed; and Augereau himself, with his two generals of divisions,
Desjardins and Heudelet, was desperately wounded.”

Cut off in one part of the field and hemmed in, the 24th of the Line,
“one of the finest regiments in the Grand Army, and itself almost equal
to a brigade,” as a French officer speaks of it, was destroyed to a
man. It refused to turn its back to the enemy, and stood its ground to
face its fate. The 24th were slaughtered as they stood in their ranks.
Colonel Sémelé and a devoted band of soldiers fought round the Eagle to
the last, and fell dead beside it. A Cossack picked the Eagle up and
rode off with it.

The 14th had led the attack. It had lost heavily from the Russian
cannonade, but was still pressing on when the cavalry came charging
down. The regiments next following it, however, had suffered still more
heavily from the artillery fire. They were swept away _en masse_ by the
Cossack rush. Thus the 14th were cut off and left by themselves, barely
half a battalion of men in numbers, in the midst of the raging torrent
of Cossacks and dragoons. The survivors hastily threw themselves into
a square on and round a low elevation or hillock of snow. There, with
their Eagle in their midst, they stood at bay, refusing to retire
without direct orders from their marshal.

[Sidenote: ISOLATED AND SURROUNDED]

Marbot, in his memoirs, describes the fate of the 14th, to which he
was sent with a message from Napoleon. He was one of Augereau’s aides
de camp. It was just after the wounded marshal had been carried back
to the churchyard of the village of Eylau, the centre of the French
position, whence Napoleon, on horseback, among his personal suite,
had witnessed the disaster. All could see the 14th standing there,
isolated and surrounded; “we could see that the intrepid regiment,
surrounded by the enemy, was brandishing the Eagle in the air, to show
that it still held its ground and wanted help.” Napoleon, “touched by
the grand devotion of these brave men, resolved to try to save them.
He gave orders that an officer should be sent to tell them to try to
make their way back towards the army. Cavalry would charge out to help
them. It looked,” says Marbot, “almost impossible to get through the
thronging Cossacks; but Napoleon’s command had to be obeyed.”

“A brave captain of engineers named Froissart, who, though not an
aide de camp, was on Augereau’s staff, happened to be nearest him,
and was told to carry the order to the 14th. Froissart galloped off:
we lost sight of him in the midst of the Cossacks, and never saw him
again or heard what became of him. The marshal, seeing that the 14th
did not move, then sent an officer named David. He had the same fate
as Froissart; we never heard of him again. Probably both were killed
and stripped, and could not be recognised among the many corpses which
covered the ground. For the third time the marshal called, ‘The officer
for duty!’ It was my turn.”

Marbot had seen his two predecessors go off with their swords drawn, as
though they intended to defend themselves against attacks on the way.
He had remarked that, and now proposed another method for himself.

“To attempt defence was madness; it meant stopping to fight amidst a
multitude of enemies. I went otherwise to work. Leaving my sword in its
scabbard, I considered myself rather as a rider who is trying to win
a steeple-chase and goes as quickly as possible by the shortest line
towards the appointed goal without troubling about what is to right or
left of his path. My goal was the hillock on which stood the 14th, and
I resolved to get there without taking heed of the Cossacks. I tried to
put them out of my mind entirely. The plan answered to perfection.”

“Lisette [Marbot’s charger], flying rather than galloping, moving more
lightly than a swallow, darted over the intervening space, leaping the
heaps of dead men and horses, the ditches, the broken gun-carriages,
the half-extinguished bivouac fires. Thousands of Cossacks swarmed over
the plain. The first who caught sight of me behaved like sportsmen
who, while beating, start a hare and tell of its whereabouts to
each other with shouts of ‘Your side!’ None of the Cossacks tried
to stop me. Perhaps it was because of the amazing speed of my mare;
perhaps--probably--because there were so many of them swarming round
that each thought I could not escape from his comrades farther on. At
any rate I got through them all, and without scratch either to myself
or to my mare, and managed to reach where the 14th stood.

[Sidenote: “AT LAST I WAS IN THE SQUARE!”]

“I found them in square on top of their hillock, but the slope all
round was very slight, and the Russian cavalry had been able to attack
them with several charges. All, though, had been beaten off, and the
regiment stood surrounded by a circle of dead horses and dragoons. The
corpses indeed formed a kind of rampart round our men, and made by now
their position almost inaccessible to mounted men. So I found, for in
spite of the help of our men, I had much difficulty in getting across
this horrible entrenchment. At last, however, I was in the square.”

The major of the 14th was the senior officer left alive, and to him
Marbot gave Napoleon’s order. But it was absolutely impossible to carry
it out; there were too few men left to make the attempt possible. They
would be overpowered, said the major to Marbot, before they had gone
half a dozen steps. They were past hope now, unless the cavalry could
cut their way to them at once. Marbot must save himself and get back
at once. He must take their Eagle back with him and deliver it into
Napoleon’s own hands. “I see no means left of saving the regiment,”
were the major’s words. “Return to the Emperor, and bid him farewell
from the 14th of the Line. We have faithfully obeyed his orders in
defence of the Eagle. Bear him back his Eagle which he entrusted to us,
which now we have no hope of defending longer. It would add too much
to the bitterness of death for us to see it fall into the hands of the
enemy.” The major handed the Eagle to Marbot and then saluted it, amid
shouts of “Vive l’Empereur!” from the men round.

Marbot took the Eagle, and, as the only means of preserving it during
his ride back, tried to break it off from its stout pole so as to
conceal it under his cloak. He was in the act of leaning forward to
get a purchase in order to break the oaken staff, when he was suddenly
rendered powerless by the wind of a grape-shot. It was a marvellous
escape from death. The shot actually went through his hat, within a
quarter of an inch of his head. It deprived him, as he describes,
of all power and sensation, although he still remained fixed in his
saddle, his eyes witnessing the last scene, the fate of the 14th. The
square was finally rushed by a swarm of Russian grenadiers, as Marbot
says, who came charging up to the spot--“big men with mitre-shaped caps
bound in brass.

[Sidenote: FIGHTING TO THE LAST MAN]

“These men hurled themselves furiously on the feeble remains of the
14th. Our poor fellows had little strength left for resistance,
weakened as they were by hardships and privations. They had for days
been only existing on potatoes and melted snow, and on that morning
had not had time to prepare even that wretched meal. Yet they made
bravely what fight they could with their bayonets, and when, as too
soon happened, the square was broken, they tried to hold together in
groups, fighting back to back and keeping up the unequal fight to the
last man.”

Those nearest Marbot, so as not to be bayoneted from behind, stood
all round him with their backs to the mare, hemmed in by a ring of
Russians, some shooting down the hapless Frenchmen, others killing them
with the bayonet.

Marbot, recovering his senses, got at the last moment an unexpected
chance of escape. His mare, Lisette, he says, “of a notoriously savage
temper,” was pricked by a bayonet apparently, for she suddenly sprang
forward, lashing out and kicking and biting. She crashed through the
nearest Russians and galloped off with Marbot on her back towards
Eylau. He was mistaken by the Cossacks, he thought, for a Russian
officer, and rode on until suddenly Lisette collapsed beneath him,
and Marbot rolled off into the snow, where he lay insensible for some
hours. He lay there until a marauder on the field after the battle
tried to strip him of his gold-laced uniform. That roused him, and he
cried for help, which came; but the Eagle of the 14th had disappeared.

Two Eagles of St. Hilaire’s division of Soult’s corps were taken at
about the same time that the 14th met its fate. One was that of the
10th Light Infantry, ridden down while hastening forward to support
Augereau. The 10th missed its way in the snow-storm and, blundering
close under the Russian guns, was “decimated by grape.” Immediately
after that, while reeling under the shock, and trying to re-form its
ranks, the Russian dragoons dashed into it. They burst into its midst
at full gallop, “unseen until they were actually among us.” No help
was near, and in less than three minutes the luckless 10th Light
Infantry had ceased to exist. The second of Soult’s Eagles that was
lost at Eylau was that of a battalion of the 28th of the Line, which
also perished, victims to the sabres of the Russian horsemen. It was
a little later in the day, just after the 28th had made a successful
bayonet charge on the Russian infantry. They were in the midst of their
combat when the dragoons dashed into them, rode through them, and
scattered them, bearing off the Eagle, snatched from the hands of the
Eagle-bearer, who was cut down in the _mêlée_.

[Sidenote: “THE FIRST GRENADIER OF FRANCE”]

The Heart of the “First Grenadier of France” nearly went to St.
Petersburg at the same time, The 46th and 28th together formed General
Levasseur’s division in Soult’s corps, and both were overwhelmed at
the same time by the Russian dragoons. The more fortunate 46th saved
both their Eagle and the silver casket in which the heart of La
Tour d’Auvergne was kept enshrined. The casket was worn, strapped on
a velvet shield, on the chest of the senior grenadier sergeant of
the First Battalion, whose station was next the Eagle-bearer. It was
with the 46th, then known as the 46th Demi-Brigade, that the heroic
“Premier Grenadier de France” was serving as a captain when he met
his death in the year of Hohenlinden, while in the act of capturing
an Austrian standard. The 46th of the Line of the modern French Army
keeps up to-day the traditional practice, first ordered by Moreau, the
victor of Hohenlinden, of calling his name first of all at regimental
parades. It was revived some thirty years ago, after being in desuetude
since 1809. “Immediately the Colonel has saluted the flag,” describes
one of the officers of the regiment, “the Captain commanding the
colour-company steps forward and, facing the men, calls in a loud voice
‘La Tour d’Auvergne,’ on which the senior sergeant of the company
steps out two paces and replies, in a loud voice also, ‘Mort au Champ
d’Honneur!’--‘Dead on the Field of Honour!’”

The heart of La Tour d’Auvergne in its silver casket was ceremoniously
deposited by the regiment at the Invalides in 1904, eight years ago.

The 25th of the Line saved its Eagle, but lost on the field every
single one of its officers. A plainly built obelisk with the brief
inscription, “To the Memory of the Officers of the 25th,” was erected
by Napoleon to commemorate their fate at Eylau.

Two Eagles of Davout’s corps were lost at Eylau. One was that of the
18th--the sole loss of an Eagle in the battle, as it so happens, that
it suited Napoleon’s purpose to admit publicly. This is what he said of
it in his Eylau Bulletin--the 58th Bulletin of the Grand Army:

“The Eagle of one of the battalions of the 18th Regiment is missing. It
has probably fallen into the hands of the enemy, but no reproach can
attach to this regiment in the predicament in which it was placed. It
is a mere accident of war. The Emperor will give the 18th another Eagle
when it has taken a standard from the enemy.”

Comments on this, by the way, a British officer, Colonel Sir Robert
Wilson, who was attached to the Russian army as British military
commissioner:

“Admirable! the accidental loss of _one_ Eagle and only one! Colonel
Beckendorff, then, did not carry _twelve_ Eagles (and, moreover,
several colours from which the Eagles had been unscrewed) to
Petersburg, where they now are for the inspection of the world!”

Napoleon made no other open reference to the loss of Eagles at Eylau;
but, as he showed a little later, he felt what had happened. On the
other hand, outside France, many people disbelieved the Russian
official despatches. “The number of Eagles said to be taken,” wrote the
editor of a London newspaper, “is astounding, indeed incredible.”

[Sidenote: TWO MORE EAGLES LOST]

The 18th lost their Eagle in the fierce fighting on the extreme right
of the battlefield, where, after storming the village of Serpallen,
Morand’s division captured a Russian battery, bayoneting the gunners.
As they took the guns a Russian cavalry brigade came hastening to
the spot to the rescue. Taking the 18th on the flank, the Russians
rode them down, breaking the regiment up and scattering it. The Eagle
disappeared in the midst of the fight. The Eagle of the 51st of the
Line was the other that was lost in Davout’s corps. That was taken by
the Prussian division which fought at Eylau; the last remnant of the
Jena army still combating in the field. The Prussians, some 12,000 in
number, had made good their escape to the Polish frontier and reached
the battlefield of Eylau at the close of the fight, in time to strike
in and take vengeance for their countrymen. They were, however,
deprived in the end of their trophy. The captured Eagle of the 51st was
claimed from them by the Russian general after the battle, and sent
with the eleven others to St. Petersburg, where it now is.

Two others of Davout’s Eagles which came through at Eylau had narrow
escapes. They were those of the 17th and 30th of the Line. The 17th
was one of the regiments ridden down by Towazysky’s dragoons, the
troopers who carried off the Eagle of the 18th. In their charge the
dragoons broke up the 17th as well, and the Eagle was left with only a
few men near by to defend it. They were in the midst of the dragoons as
the Russians galloped through, slashing with their sabres at all within
reach. As the only means of saving the Eagle, Locqueneux, a _fourrier_,
or quartermaster-sergeant, “thrust the Eagle under the snow and stood
on it shouting for help. Colonel Mallet heard the cry and ran to the
rescue. With a few men who rallied to the spot he succeeded in getting
the Eagle away from among the _débris_ of the 17th.” At roll-call next
morning only one man in five answered to his name. Napoleon, on his
ride over the field, happening to pass by while the muster was being
held, the gallant _fourrier_ was brought before him and presented with
a lieutenant’s commission and an annuity of 2,000 francs. The Eagle of
the 30th of the Line, another of Morand’s regiments, was saved from
capture in like manner by the personal devotion of another _fourrier_,
Morin by name. All round him men were falling, and he himself had been
severely wounded, but the brave fellow had just strength enough to bury
the Eagle under the snow. He fainted from loss of blood as he did it.
Morin was found next morning just alive, outstretched over where the
precious Eagle lay concealed. He was able to make signs and indicate
that it was lying underneath the snow, and then he died.

[Sidenote: FOUR CUIRASSIER EAGLES TAKEN]

Four cavalry Eagles, those of cuirassier regiments, made up the tale of
twelve lost by Napoleon in the two days at Eylau. Platoff’s Cossacks
of the Don captured the four. They swooped down on Murat’s cavalry,
while out of hand and partially dispersed after breaking through the
Russian centre, at the close of Murat’s desperate charge at the head of
seventy squadrons to save the survivors of the massacre of Augereau’s
ill-fated battalions. Of one cuirassier regiment only 18 men managed to
regain their own lines, leaving 530 of their comrades on the field to
be stripped of their shining armour by the Cossacks.

The Eagle of the Old Guard led a charge at Eylau at the head of the
Grenadiers. The Guard came into action to beat back a daring Russian
counter-attack on the centre of Napoleon’s position, which immediately
followed the annihilation of Augereau’s corps. Napoleon himself gave
the order for the Guard to go forward. “The Emperor,” describes
Caulaincourt, who was on Napoleon’s staff, and near him throughout,
“standing erect in the stirrups, his glass at his eye, was the first to
realise that the black shadow steadily drawing near through the veil
of the snow-storm must be the columns of the Russian reserve.[16] He
immediately sent against them two battalions of the Grenadiers of the
Guard commanded by General Dorsenne.” It was just after Murat had been
ordered to make his charge.

Dorsenne--“Le Beau Dorsenne,” he was universally called; he had the
reputation of being the handsomest man in the whole of the Grand
Army--started off on the instant, rapidly deploying his men into lines
as he moved forward, and with the Eagle of the Grenadiers of the Guard
in advance of the centre of the front line. The Old Guard moved out
in stately order, marching with clockwork precision, muskets at the
support--held erect at the side and steadied and supported with one
arm held stiffly across. One of the officers who rode beside Dorsenne
suggested to the general as they were nearing the Russians to open
fire. “Non!” was the haughty answer. “Grenadiers l’arme à bras! La
Vieille Garde ne se bât qu’à la baïonette!” (“No! Arms at the support!
The Old Guard only fights at the point of the bayonet!”)

They reached the Russians, who, on their side, seemed for the moment
as if spellbound at the sight of them. The nearest Russians stopped
short. They stood stock-still, rooted in the ground as it were, gazing
at the sudden apparition of the solid wall of 2,000 veteran giants in
their huge towering bear-skins. The next instant the battalion guns
of the Guard, which accompanied the advance on either flank, opened
with a burst of fire at short range into the thick of the Russians. At
once, down came the gleaming rows of bayonets, and, like one man, the
Old Guard sprang forward and charged into the enemy. A moment before
the bayonets crossed a squadron of the Chasseurs of the Guard, the men
on duty as Napoleon’s own personal escort, sent forward by the Emperor
himself to assist the Grenadiers, dashed into the rear of the Russian
column, and “drove it forward on our Grenadiers, who received it with
fixed bayonets.”

[Sidenote: THE EAGLE OF THE OLD GUARD]

Just before that it was that the Eagle of the Old Guard had its
adventure. A shell dropped right in front of it and burst. The
fragments smashed the Eagle pole in two places, just above and below
the hands of the Eagle-bearer. The Eagle fell to the ground at the feet
of the Russians. But they had not time to get hold of it. Instantly
Lieutenant Morlay, the Eagle-bearer, sprang forward and recovered it.
Picking the Eagle up, with the flag and fragment of pole that was left,
Morlay snatched hold of a grenadier’s musket and jammed the piece of
the staff into the muzzle beside the bayonet. He carried the Eagle in
that manner throughout the rest of the battle.[17]

[Sidenote: AT MIDNIGHT AFTER THE BATTLE]

A hundred and fifty thousand combatants had faced one another at
daybreak. An hour before midnight, when the last shots were fired,
50,000 men lay dead or wounded on the field. “Never,” if we may recall
the grim picture of the scene next day that Alison has drawn, “was
spectacle so dreadful as that field presented on the following morning.
Above 50,000 men lay in the space of two leagues, weltering in blood.
The wounds were, for the most part, of the severest kind, from the
extraordinary quantity of cannon-balls which had been discharged
during the action and the close proximity of the contending masses to
the deadly batteries, which spread grape at half-musket shot through
their ranks. Though stretched on the cold snow and exposed to the
severity of an Arctic winter, the sufferers were burning with thirst,
and piteous cries were heard on all sides for water, or assistance
to extricate the wounded men from beneath the heaps of slain or load
of horses by which they were crushed. Six thousand of these noble
animals encumbered the field, or, maddened with pain, were shrieking
aloud amidst the stifled groans of the wounded. Broken gun-carriages,
dismounted cannon, fragments of blown-up caissons, scattered balls, lay
in wild confusion amidst casques, cuirassiers, and burning hamlets,
casting a livid light over a field of snow. Subdued by loss of blood,
tamed by cold, exhausted by hunger, the foemen lay side by side, amidst
the general wreck. The Cossack was to be seen beside the Italian; the
gay vine-dresser from the banks of the Garonne lay athwart the stern
peasant from the plains of the Ukraine.”

When Napoleon took his ride over the field, “the men exhibited none of
their wonted enthusiasm; no cries of ‘Vive l’Empereur!’ were heard; the
bloody surface echoed only with the cries of suffering or the groans of
woe.”

[Sidenote: THE “TEMPLE OF VICTORY”]

Sixteen Russian standards were sent to Paris after Eylau; Napoleon’s
set-off to the twelve Eagles taken to St. Petersburg. They were to be
hung, he directed, temporarily at the Invalides, until such time as
the conversion of the former Church of the Madeleine into Napoleon’s
grandiose “Temple of Victory” should be effected--a project that was
fated never to be accomplished. There, designed Napoleon, all the
trophies of the Grand Army would find their final resting-place,
in a splendid edifice, designed externally after the Parthenon at
Athens. Within, the trophies would be displayed, amidst colonnades
of Corinthian pillars of marble and granite and a mass of decorative
sculptures, statues of marshals and generals who had met their death
in battle, and bas-reliefs of famous colonels, before a lofty marble
curule chair, which Napoleon would occupy as a throne on great
occasions. “It is a Temple I desire,” he laid down, writing from his
camp in Poland, “not a church; and everything must be made in a chaste,
severe, and durable style, and be suitable for solemnities at all times
and all hours.”

Two more Eagles had yet to go to St. Petersburg before the war was
over--the Eagle of the 15th of the Line and another. They were the
spoils that the beaten Russian army carried off from the battle of
Friedland, fought some six months after Eylau, on July 14. Napoleon
won one of his most famous victories at Friedland, and one that he
afterwards recorded on the colours of all the regiments that fought in
the battle; but the defeated army carried back with them two more of
his Eagles.

The Eagle of the 15th of the Line, a regiment of Marshal Ney’s corps,
was lost in a bayonet charge while fighting the Russian Imperial Guard.
The second Eagle was left among the dead in the repulse of a column of
Marshal Lannes’ corps in the earlier part of the battle. “A column of
3,000 men advanced straight against Friedland. They were permitted to
approach close to the Russian cannon without a single shot being fired,
when suddenly the whole opened with grape, and with such effect that in
a few minutes a thousand men were struck down, the column routed, and
the Eagle taken.”

One of the regiments of the column saved itself as it fell back by
rallying round its Eagle. As at Eylau, so at Friedland the Russian
dragoons dashed down among the broken battalions while trying to
re-form under the murderous cannonade. The 50th of the Line had been
near the head of the column, and more than half of its men had been
shot down. The dragoons were cutting their way through to the Eagle,
when Adjutant Labourie snatched it from its wounded bearer, and,
holding it up, shouted to the men: “Rally round the Eagle. We must
defend it to the death!” A small square hastily formed round him, and,
stubbornly resisting, they kept the Russian dragoons off and fought
their way back to safety with the Eagle.

[Sidenote: GOLDEN WREATHS FOR THE EAGLES]

The Peace of Tilsit closed the war within a month of Friedland.

The welcome-home of Paris to the Old Guard, and public decoration
of the Eagles with crowns of gold, was the curtain-scene and grand
_finale_ of the Jena-Friedland drama. To all the regiments of the Grand
Army under fire at Jena, Friedland, and Eylau, wreaths of gold, to be
affixed round the necks of their Eagles, were voted by the Municipality
of Paris. The wreaths were to be publicly presented to each regiment on
its return to France.

The Guard were the first to receive theirs, and their arrival in the
capital was made the occasion of a series of civic fêtes; announced
officially as being “offered in tribute to the Glory of the Grand
Army.” Wednesday, November 25, 1807, was the day on which the Guard
were due to reach Paris. All had been made ready to accord them a
magnificent reception.

The Prefect of the Seine, at the head of the City magistrates and
the Municipal Councillors of Paris, all in their robes and chains
and glittering insignia of office, escorted by a mounted cohort of
National Guards, met the returning veterans at the Barrier on the
Strasburg road. Marshal Bessières led the Guard, who marched up with
bands playing and resplendent in their full-dress uniforms, horse
and foot and artillery--12,000 men in all. A gigantic triumphal arch
was set up beyond the Barrier, wide enough for twenty men to march
through abreast. It was the approach to a wide arena on which the
troops drew up, massed in front of a lofty platform, decked out with
flags and wreaths of evergreens and bright-coloured hangings. There the
Prefect took his place with his _entourage_ as the soldiers drew near.
Grand-stands to accommodate a crowd of sightseers surrounded the arena.

The Old Guard marched in and drew up in close order, on which the
proceedings opened with the civic address. “Heroes of Jena, of Eylau,
of Friedland,” began the Prefect, “conquerors of a splendid peace,
immortal thanks are your due from France! We salute you, Eagles of
war, the symbols of the might of our noble-hearted Emperor! You have
made known throughout the world, with his great name, the glory of
victorious France!” So, in grandiloquent style, the address commenced.
At its close the regiments of the Guards defiled past the platform in
turn--Carabineers and Cuirassiers, Chasseurs, Dragoons, and Hussars,
and the battalions of veteran Grenadiers. Round the neck of each Eagle,
as its corps came up, the Prefect hung a wreath of laurel-leaves in
gold.

Then came the triumphal march through the streets of Paris to the
Tuileries, amid cheering crowds, nearly beside themselves with
excitement and enthusiasm, and with difficulty kept back from breaking
through the rows of National Guards who lined the pavement, to hug the
grim bearskin-hatted warriors. The Eagles deposited with ceremony in
the Imperial Guardroom of the Palace of the Tuileries, the horsemen
dismounted in the Square of the Carrousel, muskets were piled, and all
marched off to the Champs Elysées. An immense banquet awaited them
there, under vast marquees--shelter that the men appreciated, for it
turned out a miserably wet afternoon.

[Sidenote: BANQUETED BY THE CITY OF PARIS]

The banquet in the Champs Elysées was the first in the round of
festivities with which Paris welcomed home the “Victors over Europe.”
The fêtes lasted over three days, and terminated in a grand reception
given by the Senate to all ranks of “Our Invincible Guard” in the
Gardens of the Luxembourg.[18]




CHAPTER VI

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

THE “EAGLE-GUARD”


The loss of twelve Eagles in one battle made a deep and lasting
impression upon Napoleon. That twelve of his cherished emblems, those
mementoes of victorious Caesar, for whose prestige he had advanced
such exacting claims, should have fallen _en bloc_ into the hands
of the enemy came as a galling blow to Napoleon’s military pride.
Twelve Eagles reft from amid the bayonets of the Grand Army on one
battlefield: twelve Eagles paraded together as trophies through the
capital of an exulting foe! It was a poignantly felt humiliation for
the mighty Imperator of the Field of Mars. And yet no default could be
charged against the soldiers to whom these Eagles had been entrusted.
All that men might do for their defence they had done. Most of the
luckless battalions, indeed, had fought and fallen directly under the
eyes of the Emperor himself, looking on from his post of vantage by the
wall of Eylau churchyard.

Napoleon, however, had already realised that his distribution of an
emblem to whose preservation he attached such extreme importance had
been made on too lavish a scale. He had been imprudent in distributing
such hostages to fortune broadcast; there were too many Eagles on
offer to the enemy. Napoleon, indeed, had already tacitly admitted
that. Within two months of the opening of the first campaign of the
Grand Army--during the Austerlitz campaign--immediately after Murat’s
daring gallop on Vienna, Napoleon had summarily directed all the
light cavalry Eagles to be sent back from the front. Every Hussar and
Chasseur regiment was ordered to return its three squadron Eagles to
head-quarters forthwith, for sending back to France. In future, a new
Army regulation laid down, those corps would not take their Eagles into
the field at all. The regulation after that was extended to Dragoons;
and later to all Light Infantry battalions. No doubt it was a step
dictated by prudence. In these corps particularly, from the nature of
the duties they had normally to perform, the Eagles were peculiarly
exposed to risk of isolation and capture.

What had happened at Eylau, and several narrow escapes in hand-to-hand
combats at Friedland, together with certain other incidents in that
battle which had come under Napoleon’s personal notice, where, through
a nervous anxiety for the safety of their Eagles, some battalion
commanders had kept back round them men whose bayonets were badly
wanted elsewhere, led to a further step. Napoleon took advantage of
the general scheme for the reorganisation of the Grand Army, which he
carried out in 1808, to recast entirely his original arrangement as to
the Eagles. He reduced the numbers by two-thirds.

[Sidenote: NO MORE BATTALION EAGLES]

Battalion Eagles were to be withdrawn in favour of Regimental Eagles.
In the infantry, under the reorganisation scheme, there were to be five
battalions to each regiment instead of three as heretofore; but there
would be only one Eagle in future for the entire regiment. The existing
Second and Third battalions were ordered to give up the Eagles they had
hitherto carried, which would find a resting-place at the Invalides.
The Regimental Eagle would be borne by the First Battalion. The other
battalions would carry only “fanions,” small pennon-shaped flags. Each
would have one “fanion,” a plain serge flag, of a distinctive colour
for each battalion, without any mark or device on it, beyond the number
of the battalion.

The Imperial edict, issued early in 1808, laid down that for the
special protection of the Regimental Eagle in battle a commissioned
officer and two picked veterans were to be appointed as the
“Eagle-Guard,” replacing the sergeant-major and escort of the
Battalion Eagles. The three were to be known as the First, Second,
and Third Eagle-Bearers or “Porte-Aigles.” The officer to whose
special charge the Regimental Eagle itself was committed was to be a
senior lieutenant, “a man of proved valour, with not less than ten
years’ Army service, including service on the battlefield in four
campaigns,” specified as those of Ulm, Austerlitz, Jena, and Friedland.
He would receive captain’s pay, and wear a gold-laced cocked hat and
gold epaulettes. The two other Porte-Aigles were to be, in Napoleon’s
own words, “deux braves,” of ten years’ service in the ranks, and
“non-lettrés.” On the last qualification, indeed, Napoleon laid
peculiar stress. The two were to be, as the Emperor himself put it,
“men who could neither read nor write, so that their only hope of
promotion should be through acts of special courage and devotion.” They
would receive lieutenants’ pay, have special privileges, and wear four
gold lace chevrons on their arms. Only the Emperor could nominate or
degrade Porte-Aigles.

[Sidenote: PENNONS TO FRIGHTEN HORSES]

The Second and Third Porte-Aigles were to carry no weapons except heavy
pistols, “to blow out the brains of an enemy attempting to lay hands
on an Eagle.” These were Napoleon’s own words as to that, in his order
of February 18, 1808: “Pour éviter que l’ardeur dans la mêlée ne les
détourne de leur unique objet, de la garde de l’Aigle, le sabre et
l’épée leurs sont interdits. Ils n’auront d’autres armes que plusieurs
paires de pistolets, d’emploi que de veiller froidement a brûler la
cervelle de celui qui avancerait la main pour saisir l’Aigle.” After
the Wagram campaign of 1809 Napoleon substituted a helmet and defensive
brass scale-epaulettes as the First Porte-Aigle’s equipment. He gave
the two soldiers of the Eagle-Guard a halberd each, with a pennon
or banderol attached--Red for the Second Porte-Aigle, White for the
Third--as well as a sword and a pair of large-bore pistols. The pennons
were for use should mounted men attack the Eagle; “for fluttering in
front of the horses in order to make them rear and plunge and upset
their riders.”[19]

Two more soldiers were added to the Eagle-Guard in 1813, as the Fourth
and Fifth Porte-Aigles. They were armed with the same weapons as
the others, and had respectively Yellow and Green pennons on their
halberds.

Yet further to add to the prestige of the Eagles, Napoleon, after
Wagram, decreed the institution of a Special Order of Military Merit,
which he called the “Order of the Trois Toisons d’Or”--something on the
lines of our own Victoria Cross--certain of the provisions of which
had direct reference to the Eagles. The decoration was to be conferred
on men, whatever their rank, “distinguished in the defence of the
Eagle of their regiment.” Also, according to the 6th Article of the
Constitution of the Order, “Les Aigles des régiments qui ont assisté
avec distinction aux grandes batailles seront décorés de l’Ordre des
Trois Toisons d’Or.”[20]

The special distinction of having the badge of the Legion of Honour
affixed to its Eagle as a decoration to the regimental standard was in
1812 granted to one corps, the celebrated 57th. It was as a reward
for magnificent intrepidity displayed under the eyes of Napoleon
at the battle of Borodino. The 57th had at the same time a further
and unique mark of Imperial regard awarded to it. Napoleon ordered
that a representation of the badge of the Legion of Honour should be
stamped on the uniform buttons of the regiment. No corps of the Grand
Army, perhaps, had a finer fighting tradition than this splendid
regiment--the same “_Terrible 57me qui rien n’arrête_,” of the Army of
Italy; which, too, as has been said, Napoleon singled out for a special
word of encouragement on the morning of Austerlitz; calling to them
as he rode past, “You will remember to-day, Fifty-seventh, how I once
named you ‘Le Terrible’!”

But, with regard to the Regimental Eagles of 1808, even for Napoleon it
was one thing to decree the abolition of Battalion Eagles, and another
to obtain compliance with the order that the surplus Eagles should be
returned to the War Minister for laying up at the Invalides.

[Sidenote: SOME CORPS DID NOT OBEY]

A number of second and third battalions of regiments stationed at
places out of the way of direct Imperial inspection--in garrisons
beyond the frontiers, in subjugated countries, or in the remaining
overseas possessions of France--continued for some time to evade the
order recalling their Eagles. No doubt, too, they were unwilling to
part with standards some of which had led the corps under fire at
Austerlitz and Jena.

Napoleon had to repeat his order of recall twice: once during 1809; the
second time in 1811. That second order was the outcome of a discovery
made by the Emperor himself. At an Imperial review of the troops of the
Amsterdam and North Holland garrisons on October 12, 1810, three of the
regiments had the temerity to parade before the Emperor’s eyes with
four Eagles apiece--one to each battalion. Such flagrant disobedience
could not be overlooked; and then subsequent inquiries brought out
the fact that elsewhere there were many Battalion Eagles which had
similarly been retained against orders. An additional discovery was
made at the same time, that the Fourth-Battalion Eagles had been
supplied surreptitiously, through some official at the Ministry of War,
entirely without Napoleon’s knowledge.

It made Napoleon excessively angry. He complained bitterly to Marshal
Berthier at the way in which the department which had to do with the
standards of the Army had been mismanaged. “La partie des drapeaux des
régiments,” he declared, “est aujourd’hui dans un grand chaos.” To
the Minister of War, General Clarke, Duc de Feltre, Napoleon sent a
stinging letter of rebuke.

With the letter went the draft of yet another decree, to be
communicated to every corps in the service.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON’S FINAL ORDER]

    “I only give,” wrote Napoleon now, “one Eagle per regiment
    of infantry, one per regiment of cavalry, one per regiment of
    artillery, one per regiment of special gendarmerie. None to the
    departmental companies or guards of honour.

    “No corps may possess an Eagle which has not been bestowed by my
    own hand.

    “All regiments, further, of whatever denomination, if they did not
    receive the Eagle they are authorised to possess from the hand of
    the Emperor in person, either directly on parade, or through a
    regimental deputation, must return it to the Ministry of War for
    the will of his Majesty to be declared as to that Eagle.

    “All other corps are to carry ‘fanions,’ ordinary flags. Infantry
    regiments reduced below 1,000 men in strength, and cavalry
    regiments of less than 500 men, cannot retain their Eagle, and must
    return it to the dépôt. They will be accorded a standard [drapeau]
    without the Eagle.

    “All the infantry regiments now in possession of an Eagle per
    battalion, and cavalry with one per squadron, are to send the
    extra-regulation Eagles at once to Paris, to be kept [_déposées_]
    at the Invalides until they can be placed in the ‘Temple of Glory’
    [the Church of the Madeleine, then being rebuilt].” “Jusqu’à ce
    qu’elles puissent être misées dans le Temple de la Gloire,” was
    what Napoleon wrote.

Three of the British trophy-Eagles now at Chelsea, it may be remarked
in passing, bear the number “82.” They came into our hands in February
1809, at the surrender of Martinique to a conjoint British military
and naval expedition. The 82nd was one of the regiments referred to as
out of the way of direct inspection; in garrison across the Atlantic.
It had not obeyed the order of 1808 to return its Second and Third
Battalion Eagles to Paris--with the result that three Eagles at Chelsea
represent the misfortune of this one regiment.

“The First Battalion,” ordered Napoleon in his decree of 1811, “is to
carry the Eagle: the other battalions will have each a fanion, quite
plain, as follows: 2nd Battalion, White; 3rd, Red; 4th, Blue. Where
certain regiments may possess additional battalions, these are to have,
the 5th a Green fanion, the 6th a Yellow fanion.”[21]

In 1813, in Napoleon’s conscript army levied to replace the
host destroyed in Russia, the newly raised Line regiments, and
“Provisional-Regiments,” made up of the amalgamated dépôt battalions of
various corps, had to earn their Eagles on the battlefield. “No newly
raised regiment,” ordered Napoleon, “is to receive an Eagle until after
his Majesty has been satisfied with its service before the enemy.”

[Sidenote: THE ONLY NAMES ALLOWED]

The flags issued in 1808, and after that, to go with the Regimental
Eagles, were much more elaborate than those of the Champ de Mars. They
had white diamond-shaped centre panels, similar to those in the flags
presented on the Field of Mars, but with Imperial crowns embroidered in
gold on the red and blue upper corners of the flag, and golden Eagles
on the lower corners. Gold embroidered wreaths of laurel, encircling
the Imperial monogram “N.” divided off the crowns above from the Eagles
below. A border of gold fringe round the entire flag, embroidered
with bees, was another new enrichment. In these flags the regimental
battle-honour inscriptions on the reverse side of the white centre
space in the former flags appeared in a revised from. Only victories of
importance since the institution of the Empire, and at which Napoleon
had commanded in person, were admitted. Ulm, Austerlitz, Jena, Eylau,
Friedland, Eckmühl, Essling, Wagram, constituted the full list from
which selection was made. One regiment alone was allowed to record an
earlier victory:--the Imperial Guard. They preserved their “Marengo”
honour. Inscriptions such as “Le 75e arrive et bât l’ennemi,” “J’étais
tranquille, le 32e était là,” and the others which had been allowed on
the flags of the Field of Mars, recalling deeds of the Army of Italy,
disappeared from the revised pattern of 1808. A new inscription was
specially authorised for the flag of one regiment, in honour of a feat
of great distinction during the Wagram campaign. The 84th of the Line
was permitted to inscribe “Un contre dix--Grätz, 1809”--but that only
lasted for three years; the inscription was ordered to be taken off in
1811.

The design of the flag introduced in 1808 held until 1814. A less
elaborate design was adopted for the Eagle-standards of the “Hundred
Days,” two specimens of which are in this country--the Waterloo
trophies at Chelsea.

Attractive and handsome as the new flag was, the Army, as before,
looked on it as but an appendage, as merely “l’ornement de l’Aigle.”
The Eagle at the head of the staff, by itself, was all that nine
soldiers out of ten troubled about. Not a few regiments, indeed, when
on service, removed the flags altogether from their Eagle-poles and
displayed as their standard the Eagle only. Particularly was this the
case in Spain, where many regiments were in the field continuously,
in some instances, for over six years--from 1808 to 1814. Asked one
day after the Peninsular War about the inscription and battle-honours
on the flag of his regiment, an infantry _chef de bataillon_ frankly
confessed that he had “never set eyes on it!” The silken flag, he
explained, “had been removed from the Eagle-pole before he first
joined as a lieutenant, and had always, as he understood, been kept
at the dépôt of the corps in France, rolled up and locked away in the
regimental chest. The Eagle on its bare pole was all he had ever seen.”

Said another officer: “We never spoke of the regiment’s ‘colours,’ and
never saw them. We spoke only of ‘the Eagle.’”

[Sidenote: WHEN NAPOLEON MET AN EAGLE]

This may be added. Napoleon was scrupulously exact in showing respect
to the Eagle of a regiment whenever he passed one; whether on the line
of march, or in bivouac, under a sentry, with the Eagle-Guard near at
hand, resting horizontally on a support of piled muskets with bayonets
fixed. If on horseback, Napoleon always uncovered and bowed low; if on
the line of march, he sometimes stopped his carriage in passing, and
got out, saluted the Eagle, and said a few words about the regiment’s
battle record to the Eagle-Guard.

Between the review on the Field of Mars in 1804 and the overthrow on
the plains of Leipsic in 1814 the number of regiments in the Grand Army
increased continuously, requiring the presentation of many new Eagles.
Forty-four were presented in the period to the infantry alone; to the
regiments of the Line bearing numbers from the 113th to 156th; besides
others to the regiments of the “Middle Guard” and “Young Guard,” and
to two additional regiments of Cuirassiers. In every case Napoleon,
in accordance with the stipulation that he so insisted on, made the
presentation in person, with his own hand.

In not a few instances, indeed, the ceremony took place on campaign;
and for one of these exceptionally interesting occasions we have
available the notes of an eye-witness. It was at the presentation of
the Eagle of the 126th Regiment of the Line, in Germany, in 1813.

Napoleon made his appearance in his campaigning uniform, the dark
green undress of the Chasseurs of the Guard, and mounted as usual on
a grey charger. His staff, all brilliant in full dress, attended him.
Approaching the scene at a canter, they all slowed down to a walk as
they neared where the regiment stood, with its battalions parading
every available man, and drawn up to form three sides of a hollow
square. The new Eagle, enveloped in the leather casing in which it had
been brought from France, lay on a pile of drums on one flank of the
First Battalion, and a little in advance. The fourth, or open, side of
the square was for the Imperial staff, who drew up there, while the
Emperor by himself rode into the middle of the square. As Napoleon
reined up, the regimental drums beat the _Appel_, and the officers of
the regiment stepped to the front, with swords at the carry, and formed
in line before the Emperor.

Marshal Berthier, Chief of the Head-quarter Staff, then rode across to
where the Eagle lay. He dismounted to receive it at the hands of the
First Porte-Aigle, the Eagle being uncased at the same time. Berthier
saluted the Eagle; then, holding it erect with both hands, the
marshal bore it ceremoniously along in front of the row of officers,
who saluted with lowered swords as the Eagle passed, the drums of the
regiment now beating a long roll. Halting close in front of Napoleon,
Berthier inclined the Eagle forward in salute, and the Emperor, on his
side, uncovered and bowed in return. Then, drawing his glove from his
left hand, Napoleon raised his hand and extended it towards the Eagle.
He held the reins, according to his custom, in his right hand. Napoleon
began his address to the corps in a deep, impressive tone:

[Sidenote: AT A PRESENTATION IN THE FIELD]

“Soldiers of the 126th Regiment of the Line, I entrust to you the Eagle
of France! It is to serve to you ever as your rallying-point. You swear
to me never to abandon it, but with life! You swear never to suffer an
affront to it for the honour of France! You swear ever to prefer death
for it to dishonour! You swear!” The last words were pronounced with a
peculiar stress, in a very solemn tone, with intense energy.

Instantly the officers of the regiment replied. Holding their swords on
high, with one voice they shouted: “We swear!”

The next moment the words were taken up and repeated enthusiastically
by the men: “We swear!”

Berthier, on that, formally handed the Eagle over to the colonel of the
regiment, and the Emperor, raising his hand to his hat in salute to
the Eagle, turned to rejoin the Staff and ride off elsewhere.

On the afternoon before the three days’ battle of Leipsic opened, on
October 15, 1813, Napoleon, on the Marchfeldt, in the very presence of
the enemy, presented with these formalities new Eagles to three newly
raised regiments.




CHAPTER VII

BEFORE THE ENEMY AT ASPERN AND WAGRAM


Napoleon’s regimental Eagles made their début on the battlefield in the
Wagram campaign of 1809, when Austria challenged Napoleon to a second
trial of strength in her premature attempt to achieve the liberation
of Germany. The gallant deeds of the regiments that fought round the
Eagles in that war are commemorated on the standards of the French
Army to-day by the legend “Wagram, 1809,” a name and date that stand
as the comprehensive memento of a conflict that lasted four months,
and included no fewer than ten fiercely fought battles. They are
superabundant as a fact; it would almost need a book by itself to tell
the full story. It must suffice therefore to take here only these,
picked out at random, as typical of the rest.

This is the achievement that “Wagram, 1809,” inscribed in golden
letters on the silken tricolor standard of the present-day 65th of the
Line, serves to recall.

Napoleon’s 65th was one of the regiments of Marshal Davout’s corps
at Ratisbon, where Davout had been stationed on the eve of the
outbreak of the war. He was hastily recalled on the Austrians opening
hostilities and advancing in greatly superior force. Davout fell back
at once, leaving behind him the 65th to hold the very important bridge
over the Danube at Ratisbon for forty-eight hours, until the bulk of
his corps had gained a sufficient start on their way.

The 65th had not long to wait for the enemy. Within twelve hours of
the marshal’s retirement the Austrians swooped down on Ratisbon to
seize the bridge. Two of their army corps led the advance. One took
possession of the city, sending troops forward to secure the bridge.
Part of the other crossed the Danube in the neighbourhood of the city
in boats, in order to cut off and capture the French troops left
behind. It was expected that in the presence of so overpowering an
enemy the single French regiment holding the bridge would not venture
to make a serious defence. The Austrians did not know the 65th.

To oppose the first comers three battalions of the 65th barricaded and
loopholed the houses nearest the bridge on that side. The remaining
battalion held a fortified outwork, or bridge-head, across the river.

For a whole day the battalions in the city held the Austrians at bay,
resisting desperately in the streets and from house to house. Four
hundred Austrian prisoners, together with an Austrian regimental
standard and three other flags, testified to the way they did their
duty. The battalion holding the bridge-head on the farther side of the
river made meanwhile a no less stubborn resistance and kept the enemy
off until nightfall. Then, however, it was found that their ammunition
was exhausted. The three battalions fighting the city were by that
time in a no less desperate plight. They on their side had been forced
back to their last defences among the houses immediately surrounding
the approach to the bridge. Still, though, they kept up a fierce
resistance, at the last using cartridges taken from the cartouche-boxes
of the Austrian prisoners and their own dead and wounded comrades. They
held out until further defence of the bridge was impossible, until
indeed further resistance at all was hopeless.

[Sidenote: HOW WERE THEY TO SAVE THE EAGLE?]

But the regimental Eagle? What was to become of that? The Eagle of the
65th must at all cost be kept from being surrendered into an enemy’s
hands. What was to be done? At first it was suggested that an officer,
known to be a good swimmer, should try to swim down the river with
it in the dark until he could land safely on the farther bank, after
which he should do his best to make his way to wherever Napoleon might
be, there to render personally into his hands the sacred Eagle. But
the other surviving officers were loth to part with their treasured
standard in that way. The risk of a man getting through the Austrians
who were swarming on the other side of the Danube was considered too
great. It was then suggested to sink it in the Danube, noting the
spot, so as to be able to fish it up again on some future day. Colonel
Coutard, in command of the 65th, however, was against that. They might
never be able, or have time, to find it at the bottom of a deep and
swiftly flowing river like the Danube. He proposed to conceal the Eagle
in the ground, burying it in some secret place. There it might without
difficulty be recovered later on and brought back to France. The
colonel’s proposal was assented to, and then a further suggestion was
made. Their Eagle should be given a fitting shroud by wrapping round
it the captured Austrian flags they had taken that afternoon. That
would preserve the trophies also for future days when the fortune of
war again favoured the regiment. The idea was eagerly taken up, and the
Eagle was buried in a cellar, wrapped up in the Austrian flags.

[Sidenote: WRAPPED UP IN CAPTURED FLAGS]

After that, at the very last, just as the Austrians were about to
launch another attack it was impossible to withstand, Colonel Coutard
had the _chamade_ beaten, and the 65th surrendered. They were granted,
as they well deserved, the honours of war, and were for the time being
confined under guard in the city. Their captivity, however, was not
for long. Their release came about in a very few days on the Austrian
troops hurriedly evacuating Ratisbon before Napoleon’s triumphant
advance.[22] The Eagle was now dug up, and Colonel Coutard, with a
deputation from the regiment, waited on Napoleon on his arrival, to
present the Eagle before him, still wrapped up in the three captured
Austrian flags.

In recognition of the endurance that the 65th had shown, the colonel
was created a Baron of the Empire; crosses of the Legion of Honour were
distributed broadcast among all ranks; forty soldiers who had shown
exceptional gallantry in the fighting were, as a reward, specially
transferred to the Old Guard.

Such is the fine story that the battle-honour “Wagram, 1809,” lettered
in gold on the regimental tricolor of the present-day 65th of the Line
in the French Army commemorates, and care is taken that every young
soldier on joining is made acquainted with it.

Equally fine as an exploit, and yet more renowned for the exceptional
honour that Napoleon paid to the Eagle of the regiment, was the
splendid heroism that the 84th of the Line displayed at Grätz in
Styria. That episode of the campaign, indeed, is commemorated by a
double battle-honour on the flag of the 84th of the modern French Army.
Both “Wagram, 1809,” and “Un contre dix--Grätz, 1809” are inscribed in
golden letters on its tricolor. Napoleon himself, as has been said,
bestowed the honour of the unique inscription on the regimental flag.
He had also the words “Un contre dix” incised on the square tablet
supporting the Eagle itself. Here is the story of the exploit as
related by one of Napoleon’s staff officers in the campaign, Colonel
Lejeune:

[Sidenote: KEPT OFF WITH THE BAYONET]

“Amongst all these battles and victories there was one action so
remarkable and so brilliant that I feel impelled to describe it here
from the accounts of eye-witnesses. During the taking of Grätz by
General Broussier, and when the struggle was at its fiercest, Colonel
Gambin of the 84th Regiment was ordered, with two of his battalions,
to attack the suburb of St. Leonard, where he made from four to five
hundred prisoners. This vigorous assault led General Guilay on the
enemy’s side to imagine he had to deal with a whole army, and he
hurried to the aid of the suburb with considerable forces. Gambin did
not hesitate to attack them, and he took from them the cemetery of the
Graben suburb, but was in his turn invested by the Austrian battalions,
and found it impossible to rejoin the main body of the French. He
accepted the situation, spent the whole of the night in fortifying
the cemetery and the adjoining houses, and, his ammunition being
exhausted, he actually kept at bay some 10,000 assailants with the
bayonet alone, even making several sorties to carry off the cartouches
on the dead bodies with which his attacks had strewn the ground near
the cemetery. General Guilay now directed the fire of all his guns and
five fresh battalions on this handful of brave men, who had already
for nineteen hours withstood a whole army. General Broussier was at
last able to send Colonel Nagle of the 92nd, with two battalions, to
the aid of the 84th. The enemy vainly endeavoured to prevent the two
regiments from meeting. Colonel Nagle overthrew every obstacle, got
into the cemetery, and after embracing each other the two officers,
with their united forces, flung themselves upon the Austrians, took 500
of them prisoners, with two flags, and carried the suburb of Graben by
assault, finding no less than 1,200 Austrian corpses in the streets.
When the Emperor heard of this feat of arms, he was anxious to confer
the greatest distinction he could on the 84th Regiment, and ordered
that its banner should henceforth bear in letters of gold the proud
inscription, ‘One against ten.’”

Seldom indeed did the soldiers of Napoleon encounter a more determined
enemy than the Austrians proved themselves in the war of 1809.
At Aspern, the battle on the Danube near Vienna, where Napoleon
experienced his first defeat on the Continent, more than one Eagle
came within an ace of being taken. The Eagle of the 9th of the Line,
for instance, to save it from what appeared to be imminent capture,
was actually buried on the battlefield in the middle of the fighting.
“Our colonel,” wrote one of the men of the 9th, “took the Eagle of the
regiment, pulled it from its staff, and, after digging a hole in the
ground with a pioneer’s tool, buried and concealed there our rallying
signal to prevent it from falling into the enemy’s hands.” It was,
though, after all, an unnecessary precaution. The hard-pressed 9th were
rescued at the last moment, whereupon the Eagle made its reappearance.

[Sidenote: VICTIMS OF A PANIC IN THE DARK]

Three other Eagles, less fortunate, are now in the Austrian Army Museum
at Vienna; those of the 35th of the Line and of the 95th and 106th. The
Eagle of the 35th was taken on the Italian frontier near Lake Garda,
in a surprise attack at daybreak on the camp of the Viceroy, Eugène
Beauharnais, by the troops of the Archduke John. The other two fell
into Austrian hands on the night of the opening attack at Wagram,
victims of a panic that suddenly seized one of the French columns.
It had led the attack on the centre of the Austrian position with
brilliant success.

Two thousand prisoners and five standards had been taken, and the
French were advancing exultantly, when the Austrians counter-attacked
with fresh troops, headed by the Archduke Charles in person. The
French resisted stubbornly, and at first successfully. They held their
own until, in the midst of furious hand-to-hand fighting, they were
suddenly charged by cavalry. It was late evening, and in the gathering
dusk a sudden panic seized a regiment on the flank. The panic spread
instantly to the whole of the attacking column. All order was lost
forthwith. The soldiers gave way in confusion, broke up, and went
racing back headlong, a mob of fugitives, down the steep ascent that a
few minutes before they had so gallantly won. As they went back in a
tumultuous rush, fresh French troops, coming up to their support, “in
the darkness mistook the retreating host for enemies and fired upon it;
they, in their turn, were overthrown by the torrent of fugitives.” The
Austrian prisoners taken in the advance escaped, the captured Austrian
standards were recaptured, and two Eagles disappeared in the dark amid
the turmoil. Those are the two now at Vienna.

Fortunately for Napoleon the Austrian leaders did not realise the
smashing nature of the blow they had dealt. The fate of Napoleon’s
Empire otherwise might have been decided on that night. Unaware that
the panic had “spread an indescribable alarm through the French centre
as far as the tent of the Emperor, they stopped the advance, sounded
the recall, and fell back to their original positions.”

Of the Eagle-bearers of four regiments at Aspern, the 2nd, 16th,
37th, and 67th of the Line, not one came through the day alive, but
the Eagles were saved. They were the four regiments that took the
village of Aspern and held it all day and till after dark--12,000
men against 80,000 enemies. The village was the all-important key of
the battlefield. Its defence was of supreme moment, for only part of
Napoleon’s army had been able to get across the Danube as yet, the main
bridge of boats having been broken down and swept away.

They had seized Aspern at the outset, but had been forced to fall back
before an Austrian counter-attack, returning after that to recapture
it, and hold it until the end.

Marshal Masséna led the onset that retook the village. “The Austrians,”
describes a French officer, “had entered Aspern, and it was absolutely
necessary to dislodge them. Masséna therefore, who had had all his
horses killed, marched on foot with drawn sword at the head of the
Grenadiers of the Molitor division, forced his way into the village,
crowded as it was with Austrians, drove them out, and pursued them
for some twelve or fourteen yards beyond the houses. But here the
French troops found themselves face to face with the strong force
under Hiller, Bellegarde, and Hohenzollern, advancing rapidly in their
direction. It was hopeless for the division to attempt to engage such
superior numbers in the open plain, so Masséna recalled the pursuers,
and ordered them to hold Aspern. The enemy, ashamed apparently of this
first defeat, returned to the charge with 80,000 men and more than a
hundred pieces of cannon, which were soon pointed on the village.”

[Sidenote: AT BAY IN THE BURNING VILLAGE]

It was impossible to stop the onrush of the Austrians. In spite of
every effort of Masséna, who with his artillery “opened fire upon
the densely packed masses of men, every shot working terrible havoc
amongst them,” they swarmed forward to the outskirts of the village.
A life-and-death struggle in defence began. “In a very few minutes
the village was completely surrounded by troops; and hidden from view
in the dense clouds of smoke from the cannon, the musketry, and the
fires which at once broke out, the combatants, almost suffocated by
the smoke, crossed bayonets without being able to see each other; but
neither side gave way a step, and for more than an hour the terrible
attack and desperate defence went on amongst the ruins of the burning
houses.”

It was during the Austrian opening attack on the outskirts of Aspern
that at one point a French regiment--the number of the regiment is not
given in any account--was forced apart from the rest, and driven back
in disorder beyond the village. Its colonel was killed, and, though
the Eagle was kept from falling into the enemy’s hands, the regiment
fell back in confusion. Napoleon witnessed the check and galloped to
intercept the troops as they were retreating. Riding into the midst
of the fugitives, he personally rallied them, and then called angrily
for the colonel. There was no answer from any one, and in high anger
Napoleon again called for the colonel. Then somebody made the reply
that the colonel was dead. “I know that!” answered Napoleon sharply. “I
asked where he was!” “We left him in the village.” “What! you left your
colonel’s body in the hands of the enemy? Go back instantly, find it,
and remember that a good regiment should always be able to produce both
its Colonel and its Eagle!” Napoleon’s stinging rebuke did its work.
The men at once re-formed and turned back. Charging forward with a
rush, they forced their way through to where the colonel had fallen and
recovered the body. Then they joined in with the other defenders at the
village, and did their duty to the end. The colonel’s body was brought
back and laid before Napoleon next morning.

[Sidenote: MARSHAL MASSENA UNDER FIRE]

The fearful contest in Aspern went on until four in the afternoon, by
which time the Austrians had succeeded in taking half the village. They
could not, however, get beyond that. “Masséna still held the church and
cemetery, and was struggling to regain what he had lost. Five times
in less than three hours he took and retook the cemetery, the church,
and the village, without being able to call to his aid the Legrand
division, which he was obliged to hold in reserve to cover Aspern on
the right and keep the enemy from getting in on that side. Throughout
this awful struggle Masséna stood beneath the great elms on the green
opposite the church, calmly indifferent to the fall of the branches
brought down upon his head by the showers of grape-shot and bullets,
keenly alive to all that was going on, his look and voice, stern as the
_quos ego_ of Virgil’s angry Neptune, inspiring all who surrounded him
with irresistible strength.”

Even when the sun went down “the struggle was far from being over,
and the awful battle was still raging in the streets and behind the
walls of the village of Aspern. The enemy, irritated at the stubborn
resistance of so small a body of troops, redoubled their efforts to
dislodge them before nightfall, and went on fighting by the light of
the conflagrations alone. The history of our wars relates no more
thrilling incident than this long and obstinate struggle, in which
our troops, disheartened by the ever-fresh difficulties with which
they had to contend, worn out by fatigue, and horrified by the carnage
round them, were kept at their posts by the example and exhortations of
Masséna and his officers alone. General Molitor had lost some half of
his men, and the enemy were hurrying up from every side. The struggle
was maintained under these terrible conditions until eleven o’clock,
when we remained masters of Aspern and of the whole line between it and
Essling.”

Five regiments of the French Army of to-day commemorate a splendid
Eagle-incident in the name “Wagram, 1809,” on their colours; the final
charge of Macdonald’s column which saved and decided the battle for
Napoleon, besides gaining a marshal’s bâton for the Scottish officer
who achieved the feat. That was on the final battlefield of Wagram
itself, the outcome of which tremendous encounter settled the fate
of the war. It was the culminating event of the battle. The crisis
was at hand for both armies when the order was given to Macdonald to
go forward. On the Austrian side the powerful and fresh corps of the
Archduke John was rapidly nearing the scene, and the fortune of the day
yet wavered in the balance. Napoleon, as his last hope and final effort
to break the stubborn Austrian array of the Archduke Charles’ host
which still confronted him, defiant still after ten hours of charges
and counter-charges, holding out tenaciously in a strong position,
massed his reserves and sent them at the centre of the Austrians, to
press forward in a vast column of closely formed battalions. They went
at the enemy with all the daring of a forlorn hope.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: MACDONALDS’S COLUMN ADVANCES]

“Moving steadily forward through the wreck of guns, the dead, and
the dying, this undaunted column, preceded by its terrific battery
incessantly firing, pushed on half a league beyond the front at other
points of the enemy’s line. In proportion as it advanced, however,
it became enveloped in fire; the guns were gradually dismounted or
silenced, and the infantry emerged through their wreck to the front.
The Austrians drew off their front line upon their second, and both,
falling back, formed a sort of wall on each side of the French column,
from whence issued a dreadful fire of grape and musketry on either
flank of the assailants. Still Macdonald pushed on with unconquerable
resolution: in the midst of a frightful storm of bullets his ranks were
unshaken; the destiny of Europe was in his hands, and he was worthy of
the mission. The loss he experienced, however, was enormous; at every
step huge chasms were made in his ranks, whole files were struck down
by cannon-shot, and at length his eight dense battalions were reduced
to 1,500 men. Isolated in the midst of enemies, this band of heroes was
compelled to halt. The Empire rocked to its foundations: it was the
rout of a similar body of the Guard at Waterloo that hurled Napoleon to
the rock of St. Helena.”

[Sidenote: THE BATTLE WON AT LAST]

The five regiments which formed the spear-point of the attack had
paraded that morning 6,000 strong. They numbered now, the survivors,
less than 300. They were at the extreme point of the advance, but were
held fast and unable to go farther. The enemy were on every side of
them, for in the last moments they had pressed on beyond touch of the
troops that were following next. The Austrians saw their chance to
charge them and annihilate them before the approach of French supports
to the main column could get near. But General Broussier, the Brigadier
in command of the leading troops, knew his work and his men. As they
halted he rapidly rallied the fragments of the nearest regiments and
formed them in a single square. They drew up under the _feu d’enfer_
of cannon and musketry, three deep in front, with, in the centre, held
up on high, the five Eagles of the regiments; so as not to weaken the
front, the firing line, “the Eagles were held up only by men who had
been wounded.” Broussier marked the massing of the Eagles in the midst;
and, as the firing round them for one moment seemed to lull, raising
his voice, he called out for all to hear: “Soldiers, swear to die here
to the last man round your Eagles!” “Jurez moi, soldats, de mourir
tous, jusqu’au dernier, autour de vos Aigles!” were the Brigadier’s
words. But there was fortunately no need for all to die. At that moment
reinforcing troops came up, with the Young Guard at their head. The
column, on that, moved forward again with a steady front, “and the
Archduke, despairing now of maintaining his position, when assailed at
the crisis of the day by such a formidable accession of force in the
now broken part of his line, gave directions for a general retreat.”
The Eagles had done their part and the battle of Wagram was won.




CHAPTER VIII

“THE EAGLE WITH THE GOLDEN WREATH” IN LONDON


There are thirteen of Napoleon’s Eagles in England, among the trophies
of the British Army at Chelsea Royal Hospital; or, to speak strictly,
twelve Eagles and a “dummy” Eagle, the later reproduction of a very
famous trophy, gone now, unfortunately, to the melting-pot of a
thieves’ kitchen. It is with the dummy Eagle, as it may be called
for short, without disrespect to its gallant custodians, and five of
the twelve Eagles at Chelsea, that we are for the immediate moment
concerned. That represents the first of Napoleon’s trophies won by
British soldiers in hand-to-hand fight--the once celebrated “Eagle with
the Golden Wreath.”

The story opens on Saturday morning, May 18, 1811, a day that was a
great occasion for Londoners. For the first time, on that Saturday,
trophies taken from Napoleon were publicly displayed in the British
Capital, and no pains were spared to make the most of the event. An
elaborate and dramatic ceremonial was ordained for the occasion by the
authorities at the instance of the Prince Regent. It was like nothing
else of the kind ever witnessed or heard of in England before.

[Sidenote: WHAT LONDON HAD SEEN BEFORE]

On many another day in bygone times London had been the scene of
stately martial pageants in which the victor’s spoils from many
battlefields were borne in triumph, amid blare of trumpets and
clash of drums, to be deposited with due ceremony in their allotted
resting-places. So had it been when the Marlborough trophies from
Blenheim and Ramillies, the captured flags from Dettingen, Louisburg,
and Minden, were borne along the crowded streets, preceded by bands
playing triumphant music and accompanied by armed escorts of Foot and
Horse. Another Saturday, seventeen years before, May 17, 1794, had been
the last occasion of trophy-flags being displayed in London, when the
captured French Republican standards of the garrison of Martinique were
publicly carried through the streets by Life Guards and Grenadiers,
with the band of the First Guards leading the way and the Tower guns
booming out an artillery _feu de joie_, from St. James’s Palace to St.
Paul’s, to be received at the great west doors of the Cathedral by the
Dean and Chapter, and laid up “as a lasting memorial of the success of
his Majesty’s Arms.” Some of the flags then displayed hang in the Hall
of Chelsea Hospital to-day.

So, too, had it been in London in yet earlier times, in the far off,
unhappy days of Civil War in England, when the citizens of those
periods, in turn, saw the spoils of Bosworth, and of Marston Moor and
Naseby, of Worcester, Preston, and Dunbar, paraded through their midst,
escorted by mail-clad men-at-arms, on the way to be hung up exultingly
in St. Paul’s Cathedral or in Westminster Hall. With his own Royal
banners from Marston Moor and Naseby drooping down overhead from the
roof of Westminster Hall, Charles the First faced his judges and heard
his fate. But never before in London had so elaborately designed a
ceremony attended the display of trophies taken from any enemy, as that
planned for the _Royal Depositum_, as it was officially styled, of the
first of the captured Eagles of Napoleon to be received in England.

There was to be a special display of trophies the London newspapers
announced some days beforehand. The newspapers had not spared
themselves in working up public interest. At the outset they had told
how, on the night of March 24, Captain Hope, First A.D.C. to General
Graham, had arrived in London with the Barrosa despatches and a “French
Eagle with a wreath of gold,” which, it was stated, “the general
trusted his aide de camp might be permitted to lay at his Majesty’s
feet.” Then Londoners were informed that the Barrosa Eagle was a trophy
of unusual importance, and was being kept at the War Office, to be
presented to the Prince Regent at the next _levée_. It was announced a
week later that his Royal Highness had been so desirous of seeing it at
once, that the War Minister, the Earl of Liverpool, instead of waiting
five weeks for the _levée_, had already presented it to the Prince at
Carlton House. On that came the official notification that “the Eagle
with the Golden Wreath,” as the trophy was everywhere styled, together
with a number of other French trophies, which had been previously
received and had been some time stored away at the War Office
pending instructions as to their disposal, would be deposited in the
Chapel Royal, Whitehall, (now the Museum of the Royal United Service
Institution). “The _Royal Depositum_ ceremony will be very grand, and
the martial music appropriate to the occasion, and as the orders have
been issued by direction of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent,
the Chapel will be thronged with nobility.” So one journal notified;
another remarking that “in addition to the great religious and military
ceremony, an anthem is to be performed after the manner of the Te Deum.”

[Sidenote: A GRAND MARTIAL CEREMONY]

Thus popular interest was aroused and kept alive in advance, and the
selected Saturday morning proving fine and pleasant, with the prospect
of a genial and sunny forenoon, Londoners turned out in large numbers
to see the show.

To the Brigade of Guards it fell to carry out the ceremony of the
military reception of the Eagles.

The “Parade in St. James’s Park,” which we know now as the Horse
Guards Parade, was the appointed place for the display, and as the
clock struck nine the preliminaries opened with the arrival of a large
body of Guards’ recruits who were to keep the ground. From quite an
early hour a crowd had been gathering there and along the side of the
Park. Soon afterwards the first of the troops designated to attend the
ceremony began to arrive. These were several companies of the First
Guards and Coldstreamers “in undress, with side arms.” They formed line
along either side of the parade-ground; on one side “extending from
the corner of the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s garden to the Egyptian
gun”; on the opposite side, “from the Admiralty towards the Park.”
To right and left of the archway under the Horse Guards leading to
Whitehall were drawn up the “recruiting parties stationed in the Home
District.”

At a quarter to ten came on the scene the first of the actors in
the day’s proceedings, the “King’s Guard” of the day, “in their
best uniforms, and with sprigs of oak and laurel in their hats.”
Marching up, headed by the combined bands of the First Guards and the
Coldstreamers, with the regimental colour of the First Guards, they
formed on the right, along the open side of the square, facing towards
the Horse Guards. Following them, a few moments later, came the picked
detachment appointed as the “trophy-escort,” furnished jointly by the
grenadier companies of the First Guards and the Coldstreamers. All
were in review-order full dress, “wearing long white gaiters, with oak
and laurel leaves in their hats.” A captain of the First Guards was
in command; and the detachment was made up of two subalterns, four
sergeants, and ninety-six rank and file. They took post on the left
of the King’s Guard. As the trophy-escort halted, up came another
detachment of Guards, a hundred strong, with the Life Guards; marching
across the square and through the Horse Guards archway to line the way
thence to the doors of the Chapel Royal.

[Sidenote: GETTING READY FOR THE PRINCES]

Towards ten o’clock privileged spectators were admitted within the
square, “to stand at an appointed spot”: several veteran generals, “in
their best uniforms and powdered,” as a newspaper reporter remarks;
Lord Liverpool the War Minister; the Earl Marshal; the Speaker; the
Spanish and Portuguese Ambassadors, both gorgeously attired; and “a
number of beautiful and elegant ladies of distinction.”

The Horse Guards clock struck ten, and as the last clanging stroke died
away “the authorities” came clattering on to the ground on horseback:
Sir David Dundas, Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Governor of
Chelsea Hospital, at the head of a number of other plumed and
cocked-hatted generals in full uniform, together with the Head-quarters
Staff at the Horse Guards. Prominent in the glittering array of
gold-laced red coats, “mounted on a cream-coloured Arab,” was General
Sir John Doyle, Colonel of the 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers; the regiment
whose prowess at Barrosa had won the great trophy of the day--“the
Eagle with the Golden Wreath.”

With Royal punctuality, as the clock chimed the half-hour, amid cheers
from the crowd and the spectators filling the windows of the Horse
Guards and Admiralty and other Government offices overlooking the
ground, came riding up the three Princes who were to preside at the
ceremony--the Dukes of York, Cambridge, and Gloucester.

The display began forthwith.

Preceded by the two Guards’ bands playing the “Grenadiers’ March,”
the trophy-escort of grenadiers crossed the Parade at a slow step,
and marched in four divisions, or “platoons,” to the old Tilt Yard
orderly-room under the Horse Guards. There the trophies had been taken
beforehand to be in readiness for the ceremony. The grenadiers halted
before the doors, and the trophies, twelve in number, were brought
out by Lifeguardsmen from the Tilt Yard Guard and committed to the
charge of twelve picked sergeants--six of the First Guards, six of the
Coldstreamers--selected to bear them to the Chapel Royal.

[Sidenote: THE CAPTURED EAGLES TAKE POST]

The trophy-bearers carrying the Eagles then took post according to the
date of the capture of each trophy; the earliest taken of the Eagles
leading. In advance of all, immediately after the band, marched the
three officers with swords drawn; the captain and the two subalterns.
Then, with their flanking grenadiers as escort, a file to each trophy,
came, one after the other, three Battalion Eagles of Napoleon’s 82nd
of the Line, surrendered at the capitulation of Martinique in 1809.
Immediately in rear marched No. 1 platoon of grenadiers; in the
interval between the first trophy-group and the second. That consisted
of the Regimental Eagle of the French 26th of the Line, surrendered at
Martinique at the same time as the Eagles of the 82nd, and then that
of the 66th of the Line, surrendered at the capitulation of Guadaloupe
in 1810, with, just behind them, the all-important trophy of the day,
the first Napoleonic Eagle captured--or, at any rate, taken possession
of--by British soldiers on the battlefield: “the Eagle with the Golden
Wreath”--that Eagle of Napoleon’s 8th Regiment of the Line, won in
hand-to-hand fight by the 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers at Barrosa.

Five of the Eagles had their silken tricolor flags still attached to
the poles. The Barrosa Eagle had none: it showed simply a bare pole
topped by the wreathed Eagle. The wreath, according to a newspaper
reporter present, was “an honour conferred on the regiment for fine
conduct at the battle of Talavera, where they were opposed to the 87th;
and, by a singular coincidence of circumstances, these regiments met in
conflict at Barrosa and recognised each other.” As we shall see, the
statement was a freak of journalistic imagination, without a scrap of
fact behind the story, although, strangely, the legend holds to this
day and reappears periodically in print. Adds the reporter, as to the
appearance of the Eagle, recording this time what he actually saw: “The
Eagle is fixed on a square pedestal, and standing erect on one foot;
the other raised as if grasping something; its wings expanded. It is
about the size of a small pigeon, and appears to be made of bronze, or
of some composition like pinchbeck, gold-gilt.” The “something” which
the talons of the Eagle appeared to be grasping was the “thunderbolt,”
which was missing, having been either knocked out of its place in the
scuffle on the battlefield, or stolen later by somebody for a relic.
The wreath was really of gold. A couple of its leaves picked up on
the field after the battle and given to Major Hugh Gough, the gallant
commander of the 87th at Barrosa, are now in possession of one of that
officer’s descendants.

[Illustration: Plan of the Battle of BARROSA]

The second grenadier platoon divided the Eagles from the first three of
the flag-trophies, borne in file, one by one, in the same way as the
Eagles. The first in date of capture led; a French Republican standard
taken in fight at Sir Ralph Abercombie’s victory at Alexandria, ten
years before, and kept ever since at the War Office: “the Invincible’s
standard.” “As it is falsely called,” adds the reporter; right for
once. “So tattered is it,” he continues, “that the mottoes are
not legible; a bugle in the centre was the only figure we could
distinguish.” Two flags taken by Wellington’s men in the Peninsula
accompanied the Alexandria flag: “a Fort Standard,” as it is described,
and the battalion colour, or “fanion,” of the Second Battalion of
Napoleon’s 5th of the Line.[23]

[Sidenote: THE TROPHY FLAGS PARADED]

In rear of the colour of the 5th marched the third grenadier platoon,
and the last three trophies sent to England by Wellington. Two were
a pair of tattered German standards, the flags of the two battalions
of a Prussian regiment in Napoleon’s service, composed of unfortunate
soldiers levied compulsorily during the French occupation of their
country, and tramped off to Spain to meet their fate under British
bullets. Each flag bore the legend “L’Empereur des Français au Régiment
Prussien” on one side, and “Valeur et Discipline” on the other, and was
mounted on a staff with a steel pike-head instead of an Eagle. They
were silken flags of the ordinary Napoleonic pattern. The third flag
of the group was that of a “provisional regiment”; also with a steel
pike-head to its staff.

From the Tilt Yard orderly-room the trophies and their escort-guard
set off, as before, in slow time, the bands playing “God save the
King!” The sergeants, carrying the Eagles and Flags between the files
of grenadiers, marched in the intervals between the four divisions “in
double open-order with arms advanced.” Right round the square they now
passed, close along the lines of the troops drawn up, “the immense
multitude rending the air with huzzas.” In front of the First Guards,
in front of the recruiting parties, in front of the long line of
Coldstreamers, along each of the three sides of the square, paced the
procession with martial pomp to the stately music of the two bands as
they led the way. Then it proceeded along the fourth side of the square
until it came face to face with the King’s Guard, all standing with
ordered arms, not at the present.

There was a brief pause in front of the Colour of the King’s Guard.

That was the supreme moment of the display. Now took place the formal
act of obeisance to the victors; the formal act of abasement and
humiliation for the vanquished. Amid redoubled cheering from all sides,
the Eagles and the other flags were, one and all, formally dipped and
prostrated. “The captured standards saluted and were lowered to the
ground in token of submission.”

[Sidenote: PROSTRATED IN THE DUST]

The procession turned away in front of the King’s Guard and led round
in front of the three Royal Dukes, seated on their chargers, a little
in advance of the Commander-in-Chief and Horse Guards Staff, at the
centre of the parade-ground. Again, as they now passed before the Royal
trio, the hapless Eagles of Napoleon and the other French flags in turn
were one by one made to pay homage, bowed grovelling to the dust; the
crowd of onlookers shouting themselves hoarse “with,” as we are told,
“truly British huzzas.”

After that the trophy procession marched across to the Horse Guards
archway, and through to Whitehall and the Chapel Royal; between Life
Guards on one side and more Foot Guards on the other, drawn up to keep
a lane open through the immense crowd of people who had gathered there,
and thronged the wide roadway. “The procession,” says our reporter,
“moved off the Parade amid the acclamations of many thousand spectators
and entered the Chapel as the clock was striking eleven, which [_sic_]
was crowded by all the beauty and fashion in Town.” Another reporter
speaks of the Chapel Royal as being “exceedingly crowded in all parts
with nobility and gentlemen and ladies of distinction.”

“The religious part of the ceremony,” we are told, “was solemn and
impressive.” It comprised Morning Prayer and a sermon by the Sub-Dean.
“Previous to the commencement of the Te Deum, a pause was made, when
three grenadier sergeants entered at each door by the sides of the
Altar with the Eagles on black poles about 8 feet high. They took
their stations in front of the Altar. Each party was guarded by a
file of grenadiers, commanded by two officers; the whole of them with
laurel-leaves in their caps as emblems of Victory. At the same instant
the five French flags and Bonaparte’s honourable standard entered
the upper gallery at the back of the Altar, all carried by grenadier
sergeants.

“The whole remained presented for some time for the gratification of
the beholders, after which the Eagles were placed in brass sockets on
each side of the Altar, suspended by brass chains. The five flags
were suspended from the front of the second gallery, and Bonaparte’s
honourable standard placed over the door of the second gallery, behind
the others.”

The trophies, with others won at Salamanca and Waterloo, and
subsequently laid up in the Chapel Royal, were removed later to Chelsea
Royal Hospital, where all, except “the Eagle with the Golden Wreath,”
are now kept treasured amid befitting surroundings.

[Sidenote: STOLEN FROM CHELSEA AT MIDDAY]

“The Eagle with the Golden Wreath” disappeared from Chelsea Hospital
in broad daylight. It was displayed in the Chapel, affixed in front of
the organ-loft over the doorway, until it suddenly vanished from there
a little after midday on Friday, April 16, 1852, in the absence of the
pensioner-custodian of the Chapel during the Hospital dinner-hour. How
it was stolen was apparent; but the thief was never traced. The thief,
attracted undoubtedly by the widely told story that the wreath was of
gold, made his way into the Chapel by the roof, which was undergoing
repairs at the time, to which he got access by a workman’s ladder. He
got inside by the trap-door on the leads above the organ-loft. There,
with a saw, he cut through the Eagle-pole near where it was fastened
to the organ-loft, and, secreting it under his coat, made his escape
by the way he had come, unseen by anybody. The Eagle-pole was found
outside, in front of the building, with the Eagle and wreath wrenched
off. For some reason the Royal Hospital authorities of the day offered
a reward of only a sovereign, and though the London police did their
best, the malefactor was never discovered.[24]

At Barrosa Napoleon’s 8th of the Line was in the French column that
made its attack on the right. It was one of the regiments that charged
forward across the plain at the foot of Barrosa ridge, to break through
General Graham’s second brigade and drive it back to the edge of the
cliffs by the seashore, while the French left attack seized the ridge
itself, and beat back the British first brigade in the act of hastening
to regain that unwisely abandoned position. The Eagle went down in the
fierce counter-attack with which Graham’s men on the plain, the 87th
Royal Irish Fusiliers in the front line, met the French onset.

[Sidenote: “IMPOSSIBLE TO STOP THEM”]

What befell the 8th of the Line is told by one of their own officers in
his _Journal de Guerre_--Lieutenant-Colonel Vigo-Roussillon, in command
of the First Battalion, with which was the Eagle.

Just before the critical moment, says Colonel Roussillon, the 8th,
who were on the flank of the French second line, lost touch with
the regiment next them, and had in consequence to meet the 87th by
themselves. They fired their hardest as the British troops came on,
“but could not stop them, ever advancing to a bayonet attack.”

They came on silently, steadily, irresistibly. “Their officers,” adds
one of Victor’s staff, “kept up all the time the old custom of striking
with their canes those of the men who fell out of the ranks. Our own
non-commissioned officers,” he adds, “placed as a supernumerary rank,
crossed their muskets behind the squads, thus forming buttresses which
kept the ranks from giving way. Several of the French officers, also,
picked up the muskets of the wounded, and flung themselves into the
gaps made in the ranks of the men.”

“I saw the English line,” describes Colonel Roussillon again, “at sixty
paces continuing to advance at a slow step without firing. It seemed
impossible to stop them; we had not sufficient men.”

Apparently he then caught sight of General Graham, leading the British
line.

“Under the influence of a sort of despair, I urged forward my charger,
a strong Polish horse, against an English mounted officer who seemed
to be the colonel of the nearest regiment coming on at us. I got up to
him, and was about to run him through with my sword, when I was held
back by a sense of compassion and abandoned the murderous thought. He
was an officer with white hair and a fine figure, and had his hat in
his hand, and was cheering on his men. His calmness and noble air of
dignity irresistibly arrested my arm.”

Such is the lieutenant-colonel’s own account. But did he really get
quite close to the general? Graham was the last man in the world to let
him get back unfought!

“I then,” as Vigo-Roussillon continues, “quickly galloped back to my
own men, and was riding along the line, telling them to meet the enemy
with our bayonets, and drive them back, when a bullet from an English
marksman broke my right leg.

“I managed to dismount and tried to pass through in rear of the line,
but it was impossible to walk. The ground was covered with thick
bushes, and I was crippled and in great pain. All I could do was to sit
down where I was, calling on the men to fire again. A moment later I
was enveloped in smoke; and at the same instant the English charged in
among us.

“I called out my loudest, cheering on my men; and now two soldiers
tried to lift me up and carry me. But both were shot down.

“For the time we held our own, and kept the enemy back; but some of the
English got round us. Seeing themselves outflanked, the battalion began
to give ground. Then came a second furious charge from the English, and
that broke us.”

[Sidenote: “FIGHTING WITH THEIR FISTS”]

The fight, man to man, went on desperately for several minutes--some of
the British soldiers, as yet another French officers relates, fighting
with their fists. “Many of the Englishmen broke their weapons in
striking with the butts or bayonets; but they never seemed to think of
using the swords they wore at their sides. They went on fighting with
their fists.”

It was in the final _mêlée_ that “the Eagle with the Golden Wreath” was
taken; after a sharp and fierce hand-to-hand fight round it.

Colonel Roussillon himself was at almost the same moment struck
down, and lay insensible for a space among the dead near by. He was
recovering his senses and trying to stand up, when, as he tells, a
British sergeant saw him and ran at him with his halberd. He parried
the thrust, and kept the sergeant off, and then a British officer came
up. To him the Commandant of the First Battalion of the 8th surrendered
his sword.

The fight for the Eagle--on one hand to take it, on the other to keep
it--was furious; desperately and heroically contested by both sides.

First, a gallant Irish boy, from Kilkenny, Ensign Edward Keogh of the
87th, caught sight of it, borne on high above the fray. There had been
no unscrewing of the Eagle of the 8th, no trying to break it from its
pole. “See that Eagle, sergeant!” called Keogh to Sergeant Masterton,
among the foremost, close by his officer; and then he dashed straight
into the thick of the party round the Eagle, sword in hand. The brave
lad cut his way through, with Masterton and four or five privates close
behind him. He got close up to the “Porte-Aigle,” crossed swords with
him, and got a grip of the Eagle-pole. But he could not wrench it from
the no less brave Frenchman’s hands before he went down with half a
dozen musket bullets and bayonet stabs in his body.

Porte-Aigle Guillemin, as the gallant French Eagle-bearer of the 8th
was named, fell dead at the same moment, shot through the head by one
of the British privates.

[Sidenote: HOW THE TUSSLE ENDED]

Instantly other Frenchmen rushed up to save the Eagle, and formed round
it hastily. One of the British privates who seized hold of the staff
was slashed to death, and the French recovered it. The fight round
the Eagle went on for some minutes. In that time no fewer than seven
French officers and sub-officers fell dead in defence of the Eagle.
An eighth officer, Lieutenant Gazan, clung to the pole to the last,
regardless of wounds that nearly hacked him to pieces. Finally the
Eagle was torn from his grasp by Sergeant Masterton, at the end the
sole unwounded survivor of the attacking British party. Gazan “survived
miraculously,” and lived to be decorated by Napoleon for his devoted
courage. Masterton seized the Eagle and kept it. So “the Eagle with the
Golden Wreath” became a British trophy.

From the crossing of the bayonets in the final charge to the taking of
the Eagle, the _mêlée_ lasted about fifteen minutes.

The remnant of the 8th were saved by a rally to the spot by the French
54th, after another regiment, the 47th, had attempted its rescue in
vain. The 47th lost their Eagle in the _mêlée_, but recovered it. “The
man who had charge of it was obliged to throw it away, from excessive
fatigue and a wound,” explains a British officer. The 8th lost at
Barrosa their Colonel (Autié) and the Lieutenant-Colonel of the Second
Battalion, killed; Vigo-Roussillon, of the First Battalion, wounded;
and 17 other officers and 934 of the rank and file killed or wounded.
The _Moniteur_, the official Paris newspaper under the Napoleonic
_régime_, in reporting the battle of April 5, referred to the loss of
the Eagle in these terms: “A battalion of the 8th, having been charged
in wood-covered ground, and the Eagle-bearer being killed, his Eagle
has not been found since.”

The battalion that fared so hardly had to pay the regulation penalty.
Napoleon gave the 8th no other Eagle. He held rigidly to his rule, and
set his face relentlessly against a second presentation. They must
present him first with a standard taken on the battlefield from the
enemy. But with Wellington’s men opposed to them to the end, the 8th
got few chances in that direction. They had to fight without an Eagle
to the close of the Peninsular War.

Two days after Barrosa, when General Graham re-entered Cadiz with the
Spanish army, “the Eagle with the Golden Wreath” was publicly paraded
through the crowded streets, “between the regimental colours,” as the
87th marched to barracks, the church bells ringing triumphantly, and
amid exultant shouts and cheers of the populace, and cries of “Long
live Spain! Death to our oppressors!” At the barracks “we presented the
Eagle to our gallant commander,” says one of the officers.

The Eagle was then sent to England in the custody of the officer
carrying General Graham’s despatch. Its capture is commemorated to this
day by the Royal Irish Fusiliers, who wear “an Eagle with a Wreath of
Laurel” as a regimental badge, while a similar Eagle is embroidered
in gold on the regimental colour. Also, a representation of the
wreathed Barrosa Eagle was granted later on as a special augmentation
to the family arms of the officer who commanded the 87th in the
battle, Major Hugh Gough, on his being raised to the Peerage while
Commander-in-Chief in India after the first Sikh War. “The Aiglers” was
always the regiment’s sobriquet after Barrosa among their comrades in
Wellington’s army; a sobriquet that has endured since then in the form
of “the Aigle-Takers,” although our modern recruits are said to prefer
calling themselves “the Bird-Catchers.”[25]

[Sidenote: ONE OF THE PARIS WREATHS]

It was in this way that the Barrosa trophy Eagle came by its golden
wreath. The decoration, as has been said, had nothing to do with
Talavera.

The wreath was one of those voted by the City of Paris to the regiments
that had gone through the Jena and Polish frontier campaigns, the first
of which was presented to the Imperial Guard. First of all, in the
outburst of patriotic enthusiasm in France at the news of Jena, wreaths
had been voted as decorations for the Eagles, by way of popular tribute
to the regiments which had helped in dealing that staggering blow to
the famous Prussian Army. After the crowning victory of Friedland
which ended the war, in a fresh outburst of enthusiasm, golden wreaths
were voted wholesale for the Eagles of all the corps that had taken
part in the fighting that followed Jena, during the nine months of
war, down to the final day of Friedland. It was a costly guerdon, and
their proposed generosity staggered the Paris municipality when the
estimate was presented. No fewer than 378 wreaths--according to the
official return--had to be provided. But the vote had been carried by
acclamation on its first proposal, and trumpeted all over France. Also,
the Emperor had taken up with the idea warmly. The Paris authorities
dared not back out, and had to go on with it in spite of the cost. They
carried it out with so good a grace that, as the sequel, a suggestion
came from the Tuileries that the Austerlitz battalions of the Grand
Army which had not had the fortune to be in the Jena-Friedland campaign
should receive wreaths as well, an Imperial hint that the authorities,
shrinking from the extra expense, were so slow to fall in with, that
in the end it had to be forced on them, by means of a bluntly worded
letter through the Ministry of War. “Tell the Prefect of the Seine,”
wrote Napoleon to the War Minister, “that I expect wreaths of gold,
similar to those given for Jena and Friedland, to be provided on behalf
of the City of Paris for all the regiments at Austerlitz!”

[Sidenote: ACROSS GERMANY IN CARTS]

The 8th was presented with its wreath in Paris, while on the way to
take part in the Peninsular War. It was one of the regiments of the
First Corps of the Grand Army, which Napoleon hastily recalled from
Germany in the spring of 1808, and hurried across Europe to reinforce
the troops in Spain on the first news of serious trouble being on foot
in that quarter. The whole First Army Corps was recalled; starting
from Berlin, where it had been quartered, and journeying by Magdeburg
and Coblentz. Along the route the unfortunate German burgomasters and
village authorities had to provide, not only provisions day by day, but
transport vehicles for 30,000 soldiers; mostly farm-carts and wagons,
each taking from four to sixteen men. The troops travelled by night and
day, with only two stoppages of fifty minutes each in the twenty-four
hours, for meals, and the authorities of the villages and towns named
as halting-places were compelled to have hot food kept ready so that
the men might fall to instantly on arrival. It was a journey the
soldiers never forgot. The weather was rough and wet, the roads in
places were almost impassable, and the carts continually broke down, in
addition to which the peasant-drivers requisitioned for the conveyances
deserted at every opportunity, usually going off at night with the
horses after cutting the traces, leaving their wagon-loads of sleeping
soldiers stranded by the roadside.

The 8th received its wreath at the Barrier of Pantin, on the outskirts
of Paris. It arrived with the Second Division of the corps, and
the troops were met by the Prefect of the Seine and the Municipal
Council in State, while Marshal Victor, the commander of the Army
Corps, attended the ceremony in full-dress uniform. He replied to the
Prefect’s complimentary address by declaring that “these golden crowns
henceforward decorating the Eagles of the First Corps will to them ever
be additional incentives to victory.” One by one the regiments passed
before the Prefect, who hung round each Eagle’s neck “a wreath of gold,
shaped as two branches of laurel.” A triumphal march into Paris and an
open-air banquet to all ranks in the Tivoli Gardens, with free tickets
to the theatres after it, wound up the day.

All along the line of march through France to the Spanish frontier,
banquets and elaborate festivities welcomed the regiments--and at the
same time, it would appear, gave some of their entertainers more than
they bargained for. The triumphal progress, from all accounts, proved
such hard work for the ladies in the country towns, where public balls
were in the programme every night, that at some places for the later
comers--the 8th and other regiments in the Second Division of Marshal
Victor’s corps--the balls had to be abandoned, “because the ladies were
too tired to dance any more.” It was explained, with apologies, that
they had practically been danced off their feet by the regiments of
the First Division, which had preceded the Second, incessantly passing
through during the previous three weeks, and that “most of the ladies,
through sheer fatigue, had taken to their beds!”

[Sidenote: THEY DID NOT MEET AT TALAVERA]

At Talavera, the 8th, as part of a brigade of three regiments, had a
passage of arms on the battlefield, first with the British 83rd; and
then with the Guards; lastly with the 48th, before whose magnificent
charge in the final phase of the fight they had to give ground. They
did not meet the 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers at all in the battle.[26]




CHAPTER IX

OTHER EAGLES IN ENGLAND FROM BATTLEFIELDS OF SPAIN


Napoleon’s Eagles made a second appearance before the London populace
in the following year. That was on September 30, 1812, and the Horse
Guards Parade was again the scene of the display--this time with more
elaborate ceremonial, and with the added presence of yet greater
personages. Queen Charlotte herself this time witnessed the reception
ceremony, with four of the Princesses; and the Prince Regent in person,
“mounted on a white charger,” attended, to be publicly done obeisance
to by the humbled standards of the enemy. Four of his Royal brothers,
the Dukes of Clarence, York, Cambridge, and Sussex, accompanied the
Prince Regent. Only the poor old King, blind and insane, was absent of
the Royal family, remaining in his seclusion at Windsor Castle.

The Queen and Princesses watched the scene from the windows of the
Levée Room at the Horse Guards, looking down over the Parade; the
Prince Regent was on the ground and took the salute. The Eagles this
time were five in number; and four French flags, one of exceptional
interest, the garrison-standard of Badajoz, were with them in the
procession.

The military display was on the grandest scale possible; the _ensemble_
making up, as we are told, “a spectacle grand and impressive beyond
anything ever beheld.” The First and Second Life Guards were present,
“drawn up in a line reaching from the Foreign Office nearly to Carlton
House,” with their bands in State dress and their standards. All three
regiments of Foot Guards took part, with the State Colour of the First
Guards, and three bands. Horse and Foot Artillery from Woolwich were
also there; forming by themselves one side of the great hollow square
which occupied the wide space of the ground, the scene of the reception
of “the Eagle with the Golden Wreath.” Ninety grenadiers, drawn from
the three regiments of Foot Guards, thirty from each, formed the
trophy-escort, which, as before, accompanied the Eagles and captured
standards round the square at a slow march--the five Eagles in advance
by themselves, borne by as many Guards’ sergeants between files of
grenadiers with fixed bayonets.

[Sidenote: THE EAGLES ARE HUMBLED AGAIN]

Again the trophies of Napoleon were spared nothing in the humiliation
that they had to undergo. Twice were they lowered to the dust before
the Queen; twice to the Prince Regent; eight times before the standards
of the Life Guards; three times before the standards of the Guards
and the King’s Colour of the First Guards, “the immense concourse of
spectators rending the air with their huzzas” every time the trophies
went down. Then, as before, the trophies were paraded across Whitehall
to the Chapel Royal, and solemnly “churched” and hung up there, before
the Royal family and “all the Cabinet Ministers and the leading members
of the nobility in London.”

They were this time all Wellington’s trophies. Two of the Eagles
were spoils from the battle of Salamanca--“dreadfully mutilated and
disfigured in the conflict,” according to a newspaper reporter’s
account, “one of them having lost its head, part of the neck, one leg,
half the thunderbolt, and the distinctive number; the other without one
leg and the thunderbolt.” Two had been taken in Madrid “in more perfect
state and without their flags.” The last of the five had been “found on
the way to Ciudad Rodrigo, in the bed of a river, dried up in summer,
having been thrown away some months before during Masséna’s retreat.”
The four Eagles which still bore distinctive numbers were, we are told,
“those of the 22nd, 13th, and 51st and the 39th.” Of the standards, the
garrison flag of Badajoz looked “like a sieve, a great part of it quite
red with human blood”; the four other colours “were so mutilated that
not a letter or device was legible.”

How we came by the trophies so displayed in London on that Wednesday
forenoon is our story.

The two Salamanca Eagles were--and are, for they have a place to-day
among our Chelsea Hospital trophies--mementoes of one of the most
dramatic episodes of a battle in which there were many.

[Sidenote: WELLINGTON AND SALAMANCA]

Salamanca, it may be said incidentally--the battle, like Waterloo,
was fought on a Sunday, on July 22, 1812--was, in Wellington’s own
eyes, his _chef d’œuvre_, his masterpiece, although it may be rather
overlooked now perhaps by most of us and the world at large, eclipsed
in the dazzling splendour of the last crowning victory of Waterloo. It
was at Salamanca that Wellington, in the words of a French officer,
speaking, of course, in general terms, “defeated 40,000 men in forty
minutes.” The victory was held in such estimation by Wellington himself
that he selected it in preference to all his other victories to be
displayed over again in a sham fight on the Plain of Saint-Denis in the
presence of the three Allied Sovereigns during the occupation of Paris
in 1815 after Waterloo. Of it he wrote at the time: “I never saw an
army receive such a beating.”

Upwards of 6,000 prisoners were taken, including one general and 136
other officers. Six thousand of the enemy, at the lowest computation,
were left dead or wounded on the field of battle. Three French
generals were killed and three wounded. Marshal Marmont himself, the
enemy’s commander-in-chief, was among the wounded; grievously maimed
by a bursting shell as he galloped to rally one of his broken columns.
“Spurring furiously to the point of danger, he was struck by the
fragment of a shell, which shattered his left arm and tore open his
side.” Marmont bore the arm in a sling for the rest of his life. He was
carried off the field under fire, on a stretcher made of a soldier’s
great-coat with a couple of muskets thrust through the armholes to
give it shape, under the escort of a squad of grenadiers. Eleven
cannon--melted down at Woolwich Arsenal in 1820 as a cheap way of
making new field-guns for the British Army--with the two Eagles and six
stand of colours, were the trophies of the day.

The two Salamanca trophy Eagles at Chelsea Hospital are the spoils of
the fiercest cavalry charge that British horsemen ever delivered on a
battlefield; the death-ride--for 1,200 of Napoleon’s infantry--of the
Heavy Brigade, which annihilated an entire French division in less
than a quarter of an hour. It came about as one of the results of that
opening false move on the part of the French commander which cost
France in the end the loss of the battle.

[Sidenote: MARMONT’S FATAL BLUNDER]

Marmont, after a series of ably conducted manœuvres in the
neighbourhood of Salamanca, had forced Wellington, on July 22, into a
position so unfavourable that the British commander decided to retire
towards the Portuguese frontier under cover of darkness during the
following night. But at the last moment the French marshal overreached
himself. Taking in the difficulties that confronted his opponent he
attempted to anticipate him and cut him off from his base by barring
the one line of retreat that was open to Wellington. In doing that,
Marmont gave his game away. He rashly divided his force in the presence
of the enemy, separating his left wing to a distance from the main body
and marching off a whole division of infantry, cavalry, and artillery
to occupy the road to Ciudad Rodrigo.

The fault was flagrant, and Wellington seized eagerly at the chance all
unexpectedly offered him. He was at breakfast when Marmont’s troops
began their false move and the aide de camp whom he had posted on
the look-out hurriedly came to him with the news. “I think they are
extending to the left----” the young officer began. He did not finish
the sentence.

“The devil they are!” interposed Wellington hastily, with his mouth
full. “Give me the glass!”

He took it, and for nearly a minute scanned the movements of the enemy
with fixed attention.

“By God!” he ejaculated abruptly as he lowered the glass. “That’ll do!”

He turned to another aide de camp.

“Ride off and tell Clinton and Leith to return to their former ground.”
These were the generals commanding the Fifth and Sixth Divisions, on
the right and right-centre of the British position. Then Wellington
ordered up his horse. Closing his spy-glass with a snap, he turned with
these words to his Spanish attaché, Colonel Alava: “Mon cher Alava,
Marmont est perdu!” A moment later Wellington was on horseback and his
staff also, all galloping off.

Wellington grasped the meaning of Marmont’s move. He saw his chance of
falling on in force and overpowering the detached French wing before
help could reach it.

He made his way as fast as his charger could carry him to the British
Third Division--Picton’s men, temporarily commanded by Wellington’s
brother-in-law, General Sir Edward Pakenham.

“As he rode up to Pakenham,” says an officer whose regiment was close
by, “every eye was turned on him. He looked paler than usual, but was
quite unruffled in his manner, and as calm as if the battle to be
fought was nothing more than an ordinary assemblage of troops for a
field-day.”

“Ned,” said Wellington, as he drew rein beside Pakenham, tapping him
on the shoulder and pointing in the direction of the separated French
column as its leading troops were beginning to move towards their
distant position, “Ned, d’ye see those fellows on the hill? Throw your
division in column, and at ’em and drive ’em to the Devil!”

“I will, my lord, by God!” was Pakenham’s laconic reply, and he turned
away to give the necessary orders.

[Sidenote: A FURIOUS COUNTER-ATTACK]

The two Eagles were taken in the course of Pakenham’s attack, when
the Third Division, with the Fifth advancing on one flank, was moving
forward to meet the fierce counter-attack with which the enemy, after
the first collision, attempted to make amends for their commander’s
blunder.

“We were assailed,” describes a British officer in the Third Division,
“by a multitude who, reinforced, again rallied and turned upon us
with fury. The peals of musketry along the centre continued without
intermission, the smoke was so thick that nothing to our left was
distinguishable; some men of the Fifth Division got intermingled with
ours; the dry grass was set on fire by the numerous cartridge-papers
that strewed the battlefield; the air was scorching; and the smoke
rolling onwards in huge volumes, nearly suffocated us.”

In the midst of the din and turmoil the Heavy Cavalry came suddenly on
the scene. “A loud cheering was heard in our rear; the Brigade half
turned round, supposing themselves about to be attacked by the French
cavalry. A few seconds passed, the trampling of horses was heard, the
smoke cleared away, and the Heavy Brigade of Le Marchant was seen
coming forward in line at a canter. ‘Open right and left!’ was an order
quickly obeyed; the line opened, and the cavalry passed through the
intervals, and, forming rapidly in our front, prepared for their work.”

Catastrophe for the French assailants followed at once; swift,
overwhelming, irremediable. The enemy in front had practically ceased
to exist within the next twelve minutes. The entire French division
and its supporting troops were struck down and shattered; broken to
fragments and annihilated.

There was a “whirling cloud of dust, moving swiftly forward and
carrying within its womb the trampling sound of a charging multitude.
As it passed the left of the Third Division, Le Marchant’s heavy
horsemen, flanked by Anson’s Light Cavalry, broke out at full speed,
and the next instant 1,200 French infantry, formed in several lines,
were trampled down with terrible clangour and tumult. Bewildered and
blinded they cast away their arms and ran through the openings of the
British squadron, stooping and demanding quarter, while the dragoons,
big men on big horses, rode on hard, smiting with their long,
glittering swords in uncontrollable power, and the Third Division,
following at speed, shouted as the French masses fell in succession
before this dreadful charge.”

So Napier describes the onset.

[Sidenote: CHARGING DOWN AT FULL GALLOP]

Startled and aghast at what they saw coming at them, the French
attempted hastily to form squares. But Le Marchant’s impetuous
squadrons were too quick for them. They came swooping down, the
troopers galloping their hardest, with loosened reins, all racing
forward, charging down with the irresistible sweep of an avalanche, and
crashed into the midst of the ill-fated infantrymen before the squares
could be formed.

Down on the enemy the cavalry thundered, 1,200 flashing British
sabres. Three of the finest regiments of the British Army formed the
brigade--the 3rd Dragoons, the “King’s Own”; the 4th, “Queen’s Own”;
the 5th Dragoon Guards--strong and burly men on big-boned horses,
and with sharp-edged swords. “_Nec aspera terrent_” was--and is--the
fearless motto of the gallant “King’s Own,” who showed the way; and
they flinched at nothing that day. “_Vestigia nulla retrorsum_”
was--and is--the motto of the 5th, who closed the column; and dead
and wounded and prisoners were the vestiges they left in rear on that
stricken field.

General Edward Le Marchant, a daring and capable soldier--“a most
noble officer,” was what Wellington called him--led them.

[Sidenote: FOUR REGIMENTS CUT TO PIECES]

A French regiment a little in advance, the ill-fated 62nd of the Line,
was the first to face the British, and to go down. They did not attempt
to form square. They had, indeed, no time to do so. Yet they were
in a formation sufficiently formidable. The 62nd was a regiment of
three battalions, and stood formed up in a column of half-battalions,
presenting six successive lines closely massed one behind the other.
Their front ranks opened fire just before the leading horsemen reached
them, but it did not check the British onset even for a moment. The
cavalry bore vigorously forward at a gallop and burst into and through
their column, riding it down on the spot. Nearly the whole regiment was
killed, wounded, or taken; leaving the broken remnants to be carried
off as prisoners by the infantry of the Third Division as these raced
up in rear, clearing the ground before them.

The 62nd were disposed of by the cavalry in less than two minutes.
According to French official returns, the unlucky regiment, out of
a total strength that morning of 2,800 of all ranks in its three
battalions, lost 20 officers and 1,100 men in killed alone; the
survivors who escaped capture not being sufficient to form half a
battalion.

Cheering triumphantly, the charging squadrons dashed on. They came
full tilt on a second French regiment, the 22nd, catching it in the
act of forming square. The front face of the square was already drawn
up and met the troopers with a hasty volley which brought down some of
the men and horses. But that made little difference. The next moment
the cavalry were on them. The mass of the square in rear made but a
weak effort at resistance. They swayed back, broke their ranks, and
fell apart in utter confusion. Slashed down right and left, as had
been the case with the 62nd, in little more than a minute only groups
of fugitives were left, to be made prisoners by the British infantry,
following in rear of the horsemen.

The cavalry raced on then to attack a third French regiment. In turn it
attempted to make a stand, but only to be dealt with in like manner.
It, too, was caught before its square could be formed, and was ridden
down.

Yet another French battalion confronted the British troopers after
that. It had had time to take advantage of a small copse, an open wood
of evergreen oaks, where it formed its ranks in _colonne serrée_, to
await attack, and make a stand. “The men reserved their fire with much
coolness, until the cavalry came within twenty yards. Then they poured
it in on the concentrated mass of men and horses with deadly effect.
Nearly a third of the dragoons came to the ground, but the remainder
had sufficient command of their horses to dash forward. They succeeded
in breaking the French ranks and dispersing them in utter confusion
over the field.”

All the time the infantry in rear were racing on with exultant cheers,
finishing off the horsemen’s work as fast as they came up. It was
an easy task. Further fight had been scared out of the French under
the stress of the fearful experience they had gone through. “Such as
got away from the sabres of the horsemen,” says one of the British
officers, “sought safety amongst the ranks of our infantry; and,
scrambling under their horses, ran to us for protection, like men who,
having escaped the first shock of a wreck, will cling to any broken
spar, no matter how little to be depended on. Hundreds of beings,
frightfully disfigured, in whom the human face and form were almost
obliterated--black with dust, worn down with fatigue, and covered with
sabre-cuts and blood--threw themselves among us for safety. Not a man
was bayoneted--not one even molested or plundered. The invincible old
Third on this day surpassed themselves; for they not only defeated
their terrible enemies in a fair stand-up fight, but saved them when
total annihilation seemed the only thing.”

The two Salamanca Eagles were taken now. They fell to two infantry
officers as their actual captors: one to an officer of a regiment of
the Third Division, and the other to an officer of the Fifth Division,
which had come into the fight, and were following the cavalry, partly
mingled with Pakenham’s men.

[Sidenote: TAKEN IN HAND-TO-HAND FIGHT]

The first Eagle--that of the hapless French 62nd, whose fate has been
told--fell to Lieutenant Pierce of the 44th, a regiment in the Fifth
Division. He came on the Eagle-bearer while in the act of unscrewing
the Eagle from its pole in order to hide it under his long overcoat and
get away with it. Pierce sprang on the Frenchman, and tussled with him
for the Eagle. The second Porte-Aigle joined in the fight, whereupon
three men of the 44th ran to their officer’s assistance. A third
Frenchman, a private, added himself to the combatants, and was in the
act of bayoneting the British lieutenant, when one of the men of the
44th, Private Finlay, shot him through the head and saved the officer’s
life. Both the Porte-Aigles were killed a moment later--one by
Lieutenant Pierce, who snatched the Eagle from its dead bearer’s hands.
In his excitement over the prize Pierce rewarded the privates who had
helped him by emptying his pockets on the spot, and dividing what money
he had on him amongst them--twenty dollars. A sergeant’s halberd was
then procured, on which the Eagle was stuck and carried triumphantly
through the remainder of the battle. Lieutenant Pierce presented it
next morning to General Leith, the Commander of the Fifth Division, who
directed him to carry it to Wellington. In honour of the exploit the
44th, now the Essex Regiment, bear the badge of a Napoleonic Eagle on
the regimental colour, and the officers wear a similar badge on their
mess-jackets.

The second Eagle taken was that of the 22nd of the Line. It was
captured by a British officer of the 30th, Ensign Pratt, attached
for duty to Major Cruikshank’s 7th Portuguese, a Light Infantry (or
Caçadores) battalion, serving with the Third Division. He took it to
General Pakenham, whose mounted orderly displayed the Eagle of the 22nd
publicly after the battle, “carrying it about wherever the general went
for the next two days.”

Two more Eagles, it was widely reported in the Army, came into the
possession of other regiments of the Third and Fifth Divisions. One of
them is said to have “wanted its head and number”; but what became of
them is unknown. Possibly the existence of these particular trophies
was merely camp gossip. According to one story, an officer picked
up one of the Eagles during the battle and “carried it about in his
cap for some days.” No Eagles, however, reached head-quarters after
Salamanca except those of the 62nd and 22nd, which in due course were
sent to England.[27]

[Sidenote: ONE THAT JUST ESCAPED]

One Eagle narrowly evaded capture at the hands of the Hanoverian
Dragoons of the King’s German Legion in the pursuit after Salamanca.
It escaped--to find its way to Chelsea Hospital on a later day, as the
famous trophy of our own 1st Dragoons, the “Royals,” at Waterloo. What
took place when the Eagle of the 105th of the Line so nearly fell into
the enemy’s hands after Salamanca is a story that in its incidents
stands by itself.

General Anson’s cavalry brigade, made up of British Light Dragoons
and the Hanoverians, was sent in chase to follow and break up the
wreck of the defeated army. It came upon the French rearguard in the
act of taking post at a place called Garcia Hernandez. In front were
several squadrons of cavalry; in rear the 105th of the Line. The three
battalions of the regiment were moving in column, with guns in the
intervals. Not seeing the French infantry and guns at first, owing
to an intervening ridge, Anson rode for the cavalry and drove them
in. “Their squadrons fled from Anson’s troopers, abandoning three
battalions of infantry, who in separate columns were making up a hollow
slope, hoping to gain the crest of some heights before the pursuing
cavalry could fall on, and the two foremost did reach higher ground,
and there formed in squares.” The squares at once opened fire on the
horsemen, and for a moment checked them.

[Sidenote: A SQUARE CHARGED AND BROKEN]

The Hanoverian Dragoons were the nearest of the pursuers to the
rearmost of the French squares, and there was no way to ride past
without exposing their flank at close range. Captain Von Decken, who
was leading the dragoons, on the spur of the moment took the daring
decision to attack the square with the single squadron he had with him,
then and there. Without an instant’s hesitation the gallant captain
charged, regardless of the fierce fusillade that met him at once, from
which his men went down all round. They dropped fast under fire. By
twos, by threes, by tens, all round they fell; yet the rest of them,
surmounting the difficulties of the ground, hurled themselves in a mass
on the column and went clean through it.

The gallant Von Decken was among the first to go down, shot dead a
hundred yards from the square. But a leader no less heroic was at
hand. Instantly Captain Von Uslar Gleichen, in charge of the left
troop, dashed to the front. He rode out to the head of the squadron,
inciting his men by voice and gesture and example. Another French
volley smote hard on the squadron, but the intrepid troopers galloped
through it, and, bringing up their right flank, swept on towards the
enemy’s bayonets, making to attack the square on two sides. The two
foremost ranks of the French were on the knee with bayonets to the
front, presenting a deadly double row of steel. In rear the steady
muskets of four standing ranks were levelled at the horsemen. The
dragoons pressed on close up, and some were trying, in vain, to beat
aside the bayonets before them, and make a gap through, when an
accident at the critical moment gave the opportunity. A shot from the
kneeling ranks, apparently fired unintentionally, as it is said, killed
a horse, and caused it with its rider to fall forward, right across
and on top of the bayonets. Thus a lane was unexpectedly laid open to
the cavalry. They seized the chance instantly and crowded in through.
The square was broken. It was cleft apart: its ranks were scattered
and dispersed. All was over in a few moments. Within three minutes the
entire battalion had been either cut down under the slaughtering swords
of the dragoons or had been made prisoners.

Immediately on that another Hanoverian captain, Von Reitzenstein, came
sweeping by with the second squadron, riding for the second French
square. These met the charge with a bold front and rapid volley, but
their _moral_ had been shaken by the startling and horrible scene
they had just beheld. The front face of the second square gave way as
the horsemen got close, and four-fifths of that battalion were either
sabred on the spot or made prisoners.

There was yet, near by, the third battalion in its square. Its numbers
had been added to by such fugitive survivors from the first and second
squares as had been able to reach the place and get inside. The third
squadron of the Dragoons dealt with the third square in the same way,
riding boldly at it, and breaking in with deadly results, as before.

How the Eagle of the 105th was saved--it was with the first battalion
in the square first broken--is not on record. It did, however, somehow,
evade capture--hidden hastily perhaps beneath the coat of somebody
in the handful of men who got away in the _mêlée_. Only the broken
Eagle-pole was left, to be picked up among the dead after the fight:

Described a British officer who went over the ground after the fight:

“The contest ended in a dreadful massacre of the French infantry. The
105th bravely stood their ground, but the ponderous weight of the heavy
cavalry broke down all resistance; and arms lopped off, heads cloven
to the spine, or gashes across the breast and shoulders showed the
fearful encounter that had taken place.”

[Sidenote: SPOILS TAKEN IN ANOTHER WAY]

The third of the trophy Eagles paraded in London before the Prince
Regent was that of Napoleon’s 39th of the Line. It had been picked up
in the dried-up bed of the river Ceira, one of the tributaries of the
Douro. Apparently the Eagle had been dropped, owing to the fall of its
bearer during the night action of Foz d’Aronce on June 15, 1811, when
Ney’s corps of Masséna’s army, then retreating from Torres Vedras, was
roughly handled and driven across the river by Wellington’s Third and
Light Divisions.

The fourth and fifth of the Eagles were found at Madrid on Wellington’s
occupation of the city after Salamanca--stored away in the French
arsenal and army dépôt there, to which uses the ancient Royal
Palace of the Buen Retiro, just outside the walls of Madrid, had
been converted.[28] Seventeen hundred men held the Retiro, and the
approaches to the arsenal had been fortified by order of Napoleon, but
the garrison surrendered without firing a shot. They gave up to the
victors 180 brass cannon, 900 barrels of powder, 20,000 stand of arms,
muskets and bayonets, together with the Eagles of the 13th and 51st of
the Line, which had been laid up at the Retiro for safe custody while
the two regiments were operating in a wild part of the country against
the Spanish guerrillas.[29]

The last Eagles taken by Wellington in the Peninsular War came into our
hands in the battles of the Pyrenees.[30] Neither of them is now in
existence. One was taken by our 28th in the combat of the Pass of Maya.
The 28th, supporting the 92nd Highlanders in the fighting, overwhelmed
with a series of fierce volleys an unfortunate French regiment, which
was afterwards discovered to be the French 28th--a curious coincidence.
The Eagle of the 28th, the senior corps of its brigade, was found on
the battlefield, and was brought to England and hung in the Chapel
Royal, Whitehall. It disappeared from there in circumstances already
related. The second French Eagle was that of the 52nd of the Line,
presented by Wellington, as has been told, to the Spanish Cortes. That
also has since been entirely lost sight of.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON’S ORDER OF RECALL]

This also may be added. Early in 1813 a special order was issued by
Napoleon to the army in Spain requiring the Eagles of most of the
regiments to be sent back to France. Napoleon at that time was in
Paris, engaged in getting together a new Grand Army to replace that
destroyed in Russia. The regiments in Spain, he said, would be so
weakened by the intended withdrawal of their third, fourth, and fifth
battalions (which he was recalling in order to send them to Germany for
the coming campaign there), that the Eagles--in charge of the first
battalions which were remaining in Spain--would be exposed to undue
risk. “In future,” he wrote, “there will in Spain be only one Eagle to
each brigade, that of the senior regiment of the brigade.” The Eagles
withdrawn from Spain, added the order, would “in the end rejoin the
battalions with the Grand Army in Germany, as soon as these had been
reconstituted afresh as regiments, with a sufficient force of men to
ensure the safety of the Eagles.” All the cavalry Eagles were recalled:
“No regiment of Cavalry in Spain is to retain its Eagle. Those who have
not done so are immediately to send theirs to the dépôt.”

It was due to this order mainly that at Vittoria, after the
overwhelming rout of the French army, only one Eagle-pole--with its
Eagle gone--fell into British hands, although there had been on the
field upwards of 70,000 French soldiers (of whom 55,000 were infantry),
and the French lost everything--in the words of one of their own
generals (Gazan), “all their equipages, all their guns, all their
treasure, all their stores, all their papers.”[31]




CHAPTER X

IN THE HOUR OF DARKEST DISASTER


AFTER MOSCOW: HOW THE EAGLES FACED THEIR FATE

There are seventy-five standards of Napoleon’s Grand Army of 1812 now
in Russia, trophies of the Moscow disaster. Rather more than half of
the number are Eagles. The remainder of the trophies are battalion and
cavalry flags; some French, some the ensigns of allied contingents and
the troops of vassal states of the Napoleonic Empire, compelled to
take a part in the campaign. All the European armies of the period are
represented among the trophies: green and white Saxon flags; blue and
white Bavarian flags; violet and white Polish ensigns; Spanish, Dutch,
and Portuguese colours; Swiss flags; Westphalian and Baden flags of the
Confederation of the Rhine; the red and black of Würtemburg; the yellow
and black of Austria; the white and black of Prussia; the green, white,
and red tricolor of Italy.

They are preserved at St. Petersburg, in the Kazan Cathedral and in the
Cathedral of St. Peter and St. Paul. Those in the Kazan Cathedral are
grouped over and round the tomb of the septuagenarian hero, Kutusoff,
who lies buried on the spot where he knelt in prayer before setting
out to take command as generalissimo of the national army. Near by,
suspended against the pillars, are the marshal’s bâton of Davout, and
the keys of Hamburg, Leipsic, Dresden, Rheims, Breda, and Utrecht,
similarly spoils of the Napoleonic war.[32]

[Sidenote: MOST OF THE EAGLES GOT THROUGH]

The actual Eagle trophies number all told between forty and fifty: less
than a third of the total array of Eagles that crossed the Niemen at
the head of their regiments on the outbreak of the war. The majority
of the Eagles of the Grand Army were saved from falling into the hands
of the Russians through the devoted heroism of those responsible for
their safe-keeping amid the horrors of the retreat. Of those at St.
Petersburg, not more than half at most were taken in actual combat,
and they were only yielded up by their bearers with life, being
picked up from among the dead bodies, and carried off by the Russians
on going over the field after the fight was over. Five Eagles only
were surrendered by capitulation. The others were brought in by the
Cossacks, who came upon them while prowling in rear of the retreating
army. They were found, some in hollow trees, where their despairing
bearers had tried to conceal them; some in holes dug with bayonets in
the frozen ground underneath the snow. Others were dragged to light,
broken from their staves, from beneath the coats or from the knapsacks
of officers and men, who had fallen by the way at night and been
frozen to death, during the final stage of the retreat between Wilna
and the Niemen. It is in remembrance of how, to the last, during the
Moscow retreat, in many a dark and hopeless hour, there yet remained
detachments of devoted men, the last remnants of regiments, at all
times ready to stand at bay and sacrifice themselves for the honour of
their Eagles, amidst hordes of disorganised fugitives all round--in
remembrance of that, the army of modern France commemorates on the
colours of certain regiments, as representing corps that bore the same
numbers in Napoleon’s Grand Army in Russia, the names, among others, of
“Marojaroslav,” “Polotz,” “Wiasma,” “Krasnoi,” “La Berezène,” defeats
and disasters though these were.

[Sidenote: WHAT FRANCE REMEMBERS TO-DAY]

The Eagles were under fire for the first time in Russia on July 17,
in the attack on Smolensk on the Dnieper, the ancient Lithuanian
capital, where took place the first important battle of the war. There
the Eagles of Ney’s and Davout’s corps did their part in inciting
the men to add fresh laurels to the fame of their regiments; ever
prominent in the attack, leading charge after charge as the columns
made repeated efforts to storm the fortified suburbs and lofty ramparts
of the citadel. The soldiers did all that intrepidity and desperate
valour might attempt, but in vain. No valour could prevail against
the stubborn endurance of the Russians, who also occupied a strongly
walled position that was practically impregnable. The fierce contest
went on all through a whole day, until nightfall, and then, under cover
of darkness, the defenders silently drew off and retreated beyond the
city, leaving Smolensk in flames. No fewer than 15,000 French and
10,000 Russians fell in the merciless encounter.

Next morning there followed a spectacle hardly ever perhaps paralleled:
the march of the Grand Army through the streets between the still
blazing houses, “the martial columns advancing in the finest order to
the sound of military music.” “We traversed between furnaces,” as an
officer puts it, “tramping over the hot and smouldering ashes, in all
the pomp of military splendour, bands playing and each Eagle leading
its men.”

[Sidenote: WON ON THE BATTLEFIELD]

At Smolensk one regiment won its Eagle, which Napoleon presented at
five o’clock in the morning on July 19, before the paraded battalions
of Davout’s corps. It was the 127th of the Line; a regiment, it is
curious to note, enrolled a few months before, from former Hanoverian
subjects of our own King George the Third, and commanded by French
officers as a regular corps of the French Line. By Napoleon’s latest
ordinance, issued just before the Emperor quitted Paris in May,
the regiments newly raised for the Russian War, of which there were
several, were in each case to win their Eagles on the battlefield. The
Eagle for each regiment was to be provided in advance, but would be
held back, locked up in the regimental chest, until it “should be won
by distinguished conduct.” The 127th won their Eagle at Smolensk, their
brilliant service being specially brought before Napoleon by Marshal
Davout, who, of his own initiative, claimed the Eagle for them from
Napoleon. The regiment bore it with distinction through the hottest of
the fighting at Borodino, carried it all through the disastrous retreat
from Moscow, and preserved it to the end to go through the later
campaign in Germany, and face the enemy after that in the last stand
before Paris in 1814. The Eagle was eventually destroyed by order of
the restored Bourbon Government.

The second great battle-day of the Eagles in the Russian War was
at Borodino, on September 7. There a quarter of a million and more
combatants faced each other: on one side, 132,000 Russians with 640
guns; on the other, 133,000 French with 590 guns. The battle of
Borodino was perhaps the most sanguinary and the most obstinately
contested in history. The opening shots were fired at sunrise. When at
sunset both sides drew sullenly apart, exhausted after twelve hours of
carnage, neither army was victorious. Each held the ground on which it
had begun the battle; 25,000 men lay dead on the field, and 68,000 more
lay wounded, an appalling massacre that staggered even Napoleon.

Amidst the ferocious savagery of the hand-to-hand fighting that
characterised Borodino all over the field, many of the Eagles were
in desperate peril. Several were cut off in the terrible havoc that
the ferocious Russian counter-charges wrought in the French ranks,
and were only saved by the stern fortitude of the soldiers, fighting
at times back to back round the Eagles, keeping off the enemy with
bayonet thrusts till help should come. In one part of the field the
9th of the Line was isolated and for a time broken up and scattered.
The Eagle-bearer was cut off by himself and surrounded. He saved the
Eagle, as he fell wounded. “Amidst the confusion, wounded by two
bayonet thrusts, I fell, but I was able to make an effort to prevent
the Eagle falling into the hands of the enemy. Some of them rushed at
me and closed round, but, getting to my feet, I managed to fling the
Eagle, staff and all, over their heads towards some of our men, whom I
had caught sight of, fortunately near by, trying to charge through and
rescue the Eagle. This was all I could do before I fell again and was
made prisoner.” The brave fellow returned to France two years later,
at the Peace of 1814, and made his way to the regimental dépôt, where
he found barely twenty of his comrades at Borodino left. The rest had
succumbed during the retreat from Moscow. The survivors had brought
back the Eagle to France; only, however, to have to give it up to the
new Minister of War for destruction.

[Sidenote: TWO EAGLES JUST SAVED]

The 18th of the Line, broken in a Russian counter-attack, after
storming one of the Russian redoubts erected to defend part of the
position, rallied with their Eagle in their midst and held their ground
in spite of repeated attacks until help could get through to them. At
the roll-call next morning, 40 officers out of 50, and 800 men out of
2,000 were reported as missing; left dead or wounded on the field.
Another regiment lost its colonel and half one battalion dead on the
field; the Eagle-Guard were all shot down or bayoneted round the Eagle,
which in the end was saved and brought out of the battle by a corporal,
who was awarded a commission by Napoleon in the presence of the remains
of the regiment next day. The Eagle of the 61st of the Line again
was only kept out of Russian hands by the devotion of the men round
it. Napoleon rode past the regiment next day while being paraded for
the roll to be called. Only two battalions were there, and he asked
the colonel where the third battalion was. “It is in the redoubt,
Sire!” was the officer’s reply, pointing in the direction of the Great
Redoubt, round which some of the hardest fighting of the day had taken
place. The battalion had literally been annihilated: not an officer or
a man of the 1,100 in the third battalion of the 61st had returned from
the fight.

A regiment of Cuirassiers lost its Eagle at Borodino: the Eagle had
disappeared in the midst of a fierce _mêlée_, in which the Eagle-bearer
had gone down. The loss was not discovered till later. All, however,
refused to believe that it had been captured: that was incredible.
The dead Eagle-bearer’s body was found after the battle, but no Eagle
was there. Overwhelmed with shame, the regiment had to admit that the
impossible had happened, and during the weeks that they were at Moscow
“they remained plunged in a profound dolour.” The Eagle reappeared in
an extraordinary way. In the retreat, when passing the scene of the
battle, a ghastly and horrible spectacle with its unburied corpses
and the carcasses of horses strewn thickly and heaped up all over the
field, a sudden thought struck one of the officers. Late that night,
he and a brother officer, taking the risk of capture by Cossacks on
the prowl in rear of the retreating army, rode back and found their
way by moonlight to where the Cuirassiers had had their fight and the
Eagle-bearer had fallen. They found the Eagle inside the carcass of
the Eagle-bearer’s horse. It had been thrust in there by the dying
Eagle-bearer through the gaping wound that had killed the horse, as the
only means to conceal it in the midst of the enemy.

[Sidenote: HOW THE EAGLES ENTERED MOSCOW]

The Eagles made their last triumphant entry into a conquered capital
at Moscow on September 14, the Eagle of the Old Guard leading the
way at the head of the grenadiers of the Guard, all wearing for the
day their full-dress parade uniform. As has been said, every officer
and soldier of the Guard, by Napoleon’s standing order, carried a
suit of full-dress uniform in his kit or knapsack on campaign in
readiness for such occasions--“en tenue de parade comme si elle eut
défiler au Carrousel.” They had marched like that with music and
full military pomp twice through Vienna, and through the streets of
Berlin and Madrid; but there was at Moscow a disconcerting and ominous
difference, both in their surroundings and in the reception that they
met. Elsewhere, alike in Vienna, Berlin, and Madrid, the parade march
of the victorious Eagles passed through densely crowded streets of
onlookers, silently gazing with dejected mien at the scene. At Moscow
not a soul was in the streets, at the windows, anywhere; on every side
were emptiness and desolation. The inhabitants had fled the city, and
only deserted houses remained. The first incendiary fires at Moscow
broke out at midnight, within twelve hours of Napoleon taking up his
residence in the Kremlin.

The spell after that was broken. Henceforward victory deserted the
Eagles; the hour of fate was at hand for Napoleon and the Grand Army.
The Fortune of War, indeed, turned against the Eagles even before
Napoleon had quitted Moscow.

Early on October 18, Napoleon, while at breakfast in the Kremlin,
suddenly heard distant cannonading away to the south. He learned
what had happened that afternoon while holding a review of the
Italian Royal Guard. “We hastily regained our quarters, packed up our
parade-uniforms, put on our service kit ... and to the sound of our
drums and bands threaded our way through the streets of Moscow at five
in the afternoon.” During the past five weeks, while all had been
outwardly quiet, the Russian armies had been manœvring to close in
along the only road of retreat open to Napoleon.

[Sidenote: THE FIRST SENT TO THE CZAR]

The nearest of the Russian armies, concentrated to the south-west of
Moscow, struck the first blow on October 18 at daybreak, by surprising
Murat’s cavalry camp near Vinkovo. The results to the French were
disastrous. Two thousand of Murat’s men were killed and as many
more were taken prisoners. Between thirty and forty guns were lost,
and Murat’s personal camp-baggage train, which included “his silver
canteens and cooking utensils, in which cats’ and horse flesh were
found prepared for food”--a discovery that opened the eyes of the
Russians to the precarious position of affairs in Napoleon’s army.
Murat himself, according to one story, “rode off on the first alarm in
his shirt.” He only got away, according to another, by cutting his way
through the Russians sword in hand, at the head of his personal escort
of carabineers. Two Eagles were spoils of the surprise; the first to
fall into Russian hands in the war. They were lost in the general
scrimmage, their bearers being sabred at the outset of the Russian
onslaught. The Eagles were at once sent off to St. Petersburg to be
presented to the Czar Alexander.

On the other hand nine Eagles were saved, their escorts fighting their
way successfully through the Russians.

Many stories are recorded in memoirs of survivors of the Grand Army of
heroic endeavours made repeatedly by officers and men to save their
Eagles from the enemy amid the disasters and horrors of the retreat.
Their devotion and self-sacrifice had their reward in the preservation
of seven Eagles in every ten.

Two Eagles were lost fourteen days after leaving Moscow, in the
disastrous battle at Wiasma on November 2, halfway on the road back to
Smolensk, where the advanced columns of the pursuing Russians attacked
and all but cut the retreating French army in two. The rearguard of
the Grand Army, Marshal Davout’s corps, with the Italian corps of the
Viceroy Eugène Beauharnais, was overpowered and driven in and broken
up; crushed under the overpowering artillery fire of the Russians. They
left behind 6,000 dead, 2,000 prisoners, and 27 guns. Two Eagles were
taken, their regiments being virtually annihilated, but twenty-one
were saved. They were safeguarded through the rout by groups of
brave-hearted officers and men, who beat off the rushes made at them
by the Russian cavalry and the Cossacks. They fought their way through
until they met Ney’s troops, who had heard the firing and turned back,
arriving in time to stem and check the Russian pursuit and enable
what was left of the two shattered army corps to rally under their
protection.

[Sidenote: “WE HAVE DONE OUR DUTY!”]

One infantry regiment at Wiasma perished on the battlefield to a man,
but saved its Eagle. It was the rearmost of all, and was isolated and
surrounded beyond reach of help. In vain its men formed square and
tried to fight their way after the rest through the surging masses of
the Russians. They made their way for a time until the enemy brought
up artillery. A Russian battery galloped up, unlimbered close to them,
and opened fire with murderous effect. The Frenchmen tried desperately
to charge the guns, but were beaten back by a rush of cavalry. At last,
in despair, they formed square and faced the cruel slaughter that the
guns made in their ranks, in the hope that help might reach them. Terms
were offered them and refused. They would not surrender, and fought on
till dusk, when their ammunition gave out. The Russians were closing
round for a final decisive charge on the small handful of survivors,
when the wounded colonel, seeing all was over, made the attempt that
saved the Eagle. The scanty remnant of what had that morning been a
regiment of 3,000 men formed round in a ring, facing towards the enemy
with bayonets levelled. The Eagle-staff was broken up and the fragments
thrust under the ground. With flint and steel a match was lighted and
the silken tricolor consumed. The Eagle was then tied up in a havresac
and entrusted to an old soldier who was known to be a good rider. The
colonel, giving up his own charger to the man, bade him watch his
chance and, as the enemy came on in the dark, dash through them and
ride his hardest. “Carry the Eagle to his Majesty,” were the colonel’s
words. “Deliver it to him, and tell him that we have done our duty!”
The man rode off. He was able to get through the nearest Russians under
cover of the darkness, having to fight his way before he got clear, and
receiving several wounds. Then his horse fell dead from its injuries.
On foot he stumbled on, and before midnight reached, not Napoleon, but
Marshal Ney, to whom he gave up his precious charge. No officer or man
of the others of the luckless regiment was ever heard of in France
again. No prisoners from it ever returned--only the Eagle survived.

Three days after Wiasma the Russian winter suddenly set in on the
doomed host. It brought about at once the disintegration and
disorganisation of the Grand Army. Already, demoralised by their
privation, hundreds of men had fallen out of the ranks, flinging away
their muskets and knapsacks, and straggling along in disorderly groups.
A third practically of the Army ceased to exist as a fighting force
within the first fortnight of the retreat, before the first snows fell.
The others, though, still kept to their duty. Marching in the ranks day
after day, they strove their hardest to beat back the incessant attacks
of the swarms of Cossacks, hovering round on the watch to raid the
baggage-convoys at every block or stoppage on the road. With the coming
of the snow the doom of the Grand Army was sealed. It was impossible to
maintain discipline with the thermometer at twenty degrees below zero.
Men dropped dead from cold by the score every half-mile.

On November 6 the sun disappeared; a grey fog enshrouded everything;
the frost set in; and a bitter north wind in howling gusts swept over
the face of the land; with it came down the snow, falling hour after
hour by day and night without ceasing.

“From that day the Army lost its courage and its military instinct. The
soldier no longer obeyed his officer. The officer separated himself
from his general. The disbanded regiments marched in disorder. In
their frantic search for food they spread themselves over the plain,
pillaging and destroying whatever fell in their way.” So a survivor
wrote.

The snow came down “in large broad flakes, which at once chilled and
blinded the soldiers: the marchers, however, stumbled forward, men
often struggling and at last sinking in holes and ravines that were
concealed from them by the new and disguised appearance of the country.
Those who yet retained discipline and kept their ranks stood some
chance of receiving assistance; but amid the mass of stragglers, the
men’s hearts, intent only on self-preservation, became hardened and
closed against every feeling of sympathy and compassion. The storm-wind
lifted the snow from the earth, as well as that steadily pelting down
from above, into dizzy eddies round the soldiers. Many were hurled to
the ground in this manner, while the same snow furnished them with an
instant grave, under which they were concealed until the next summer
came, to display their ghastly remains in the open air.”

[Sidenote: WHEN THE COSSACKS GOT TO WORK]

The Cossacks redoubled their attacks on the retreating army after
Wiasma. They had harassed the French incessantly from the day after
Napoleon passed Mojaisk, but after Wiasma their audacity increased a
hundredfold. They captured prisoners hourly, from among the stragglers
mostly; in droves, by fifties and hundreds at a time. Day after day
they hung on the flanks, swooping down with loud shouts on the
unfortunate wretches, rounding them up like sheep, and driving them
before them towards their own camps at the points of their long lances.
Many they killed on the spot, or stripped naked to perish in the snow.
Others they drove along to the nearest camp of Kutusoff’s regulars for
the sake of the money reward offered for prisoners brought in alive.
Others again, to save themselves the trouble of driving them all the
way to the army camp, they handed over to peasants in the villages,
selling them at a rouble a head, for the peasants to make sport of
and maltreat or kill. The brutalities and ruthless devastations that
the French army had committed in its advance to Moscow had infuriated
the Russian peasantry. Intent on vengeance they now made use of their
opportunity to the full. They burned alive some of their captives, by
tossing them into pits half filled with blazing pine-logs. Seventy
were done to death in this horrible way in one village. Others they
buried up to their necks in the ground and left to die; or else tied
them to trees for the wolves to tear to pieces.[33] Others they clubbed
or flogged to death, tying down the wretched Frenchmen to logs on
the ground, hounding on the women and children to hammer their heads
to pieces with thick sticks. A common method of Cossacks and peasants
alike for making prisoners was to light great watch-fires at night,
a little way off from the retreating column, and as the frozen and
starving stragglers came crowding up to the blaze they surrounded them
and carried them off wholesale.

After the snow set in, guns and baggage-wagons were abandoned to the
Cossacks at almost every hundred yards. It was impossible for the
weakened and dying horses to drag them along; even to keep their
footing on the frozen ground. Within the first week after Wiasma the
appalling number of 30,000 horses either died of starvation, there
being no way of getting fodder for them because of the snow, or were
frozen to death.

[Sidenote: THE EAGLES OF NEY’S CORPS]

In spite of everything, some of the regiments still kept together and
marched in military formation, with their Eagles at their head; those
in particular of Marshal Ney’s corps. They formed the rearguard and
chief protection to the army from Wiasma onwards; held together by the
heroic example and personality of their indefatigable leader, ever
present where there was fighting, ever calm and confident, and ready
with words of encouragement. Not an Eagle was lost along the line of
march between Moscow and Smolensk by Ney’s men; rallying round them to
beat off the Cossack attacks time and again with the cry, “Aux Aigles!
Voici les Cosaques!”

This incident, not unlike the cuirassier ride to recover the Eagle left
on the field at Borodino, is said to have taken place between Wiasma
and Smolensk. One regiment of Ney’s cavalry missed its Eagle after a
sharp fight on the road, the Eagle-bearer having apparently fallen
during the encounter, unseen by the survivors. That night round the
bivouac fire lots were drawn, and two officers rode back amid blinding
snow squalls to try to find the Eagle. They successfully evaded the
Cossacks and made their way ten miles back to the scene of the combat,
where, after scaring off some wolves, they searched in the snow and
found the dead officer’s body with the Eagle by its side. They brought
it back safely to the regiment and restored it to their comrades. Their
limbs were frost-bitten and rigid from cold, so that they had to be
lifted off their horses, but the brave men were content--they had saved
their Eagle.

[Illustration:

    _Photo Alinari._

MARSHAL NEY WITH THE REARGUARD IN THE RETREAT FROM MOSCOW.

From a picture by A. Ivon, at Versailles.]

[Sidenote: SO FAR TEN EAGLES LOST]

At Krasnoi, on November 19, between Smolensk and the Beresina, Napoleon
underwent another severe defeat from the pursuing Russians, 10,000
prisoners and 70 guns falling into the victors’ hands. Two Eagles were
carried off from the battlefield and despatched to St. Petersburg
by special courier, together with Kutusoff’s report to the Czar.
Twenty-seven Eagles, however, got past the Russians, fighting their
way through, thanks to the endurance of brave men who rallied round
them. Krasnoi it was that gave the death-blow to Napoleon’s last hope
of rallying the Grand Army. After it less than 30,000 men remained
under arms with the main column, including the 8,000 survivors of the
Imperial Guard. Up to then, according to the Russian official returns,
80,000 prisoners, 500 guns, and “40 standards and flags of all kinds”
had fallen into the hands of the pursuers. Not more than ten, however,
of the forty standards taken were Eagles: the two taken at Murat’s
surprise at Vinkovo; the two taken at Wiasma; the two taken at Krasnoi;
also two taken before Napoleon reached Smolensk, from a brigade sent
from Smolensk to help him on the road, which blundered into the middle
of the Russian army and had to surrender; and two captured elsewhere,
from the French flanking armies of Marshal Macdonald and Marshal St.
Cyr. An eleventh Eagle was taken in the second battle at Krasnoi,
from Ney’s rearguard; the only Eagle that Ney actually lost in fight
throughout the 600 miles’ march between Moscow and the frontier.

At Krasnoi, Ney’s rearguard, following at a day’s march behind the
rest of the army, found its way barred. The Russians, after defeating
Napoleon’s main column, a day’s march in advance, had waited on the
scene of the former fighting for Ney. They held a position that it was
practically impossible for Ney’s comparatively small force to get past.
After vainly attempting to break through, Ney had to draw back, and
make a forlorn-hope effort to avoid destruction by a long détour, in
the course of which he had to abandon guns, baggage, and horses, and
cross the Dnieper on ice hardly thick enough to bear the weight of a
man.

On the eve of Krasnoi, indeed, the rearguard found itself in so
desperate a position, that Ney ordered all its Eagles to be destroyed.
His regiments had suffered so severely in their continuous fighting,
that it was impossible adequately to safeguard the Eagles. Every
musket and bayonet was wanted in the fighting line. It was impossible
to supply sufficient Eagle-escorts. So far, in spite of the dreadful
straits to which some of the regiments had been reduced, all had
marched openly with their Eagles, and fought round them, guarding them
sedulously by night and day. “When excess of fatigue constrained us to
take a few moments of repose,” describes Colonel De Fesenzac of the 4th
of the Line, “we (what was left of the regiment able to carry arms--not
100 men) assembled together in any place where we could find shelter,
a few of the men standing by to mount guard for the protection of the
regimental Eagle.”

“Then,” describes the colonel, “came the order that all the Eagles
should be broken up and buried. As I could not make up my mind to
this, I directed that the staff should be burned, and that the Eagle
of the 4th Regiment should be stowed in the knapsack of one of the
Eagle-bearers, by whose side I kept my post on the march.” The Eagle
of the 4th, it may be added by the way, was the identical Eagle that
Napoleon had presented to the regiment in place of that lost at
Austerlitz, in exchange for, as has been told, two captured Austrian
flags.

[Sidenote: “THEY OUGHT TO PERISH WITH US”]

Other officers did the same as Colonel De Fesenzac. One officer,
however, the colonel of the 18th of the Line, flatly refused to have
his regimental Eagle either broken up or hidden away. “The Eagle,” he
says in his journal, which still exists, “had throughout, until then,
been carried at the head of the regiment, and I declined to obey the
order on behalf of the 18th. It seemed to us a monstrous ignominy. Our
Eagles were not given us to be made away with or hidden: they ought to
perish with us.” The Eagle of the 18th did actually perish with the
regiment. In the rearguard repulse at Krasnoi the entire regiment was
destroyed, except for some twenty survivors, including the colonel,
severely wounded. “Our Eagle,” says the gallant colonel, proudly
recording its fate, “remained among our dead on the field of battle.”

That Eagle of the 18th was the only one of Marshal Ney’s Eagles to
fall into the hands of the Russians in battle. Some ten of the Eagles
now at St. Petersburg were found on the bodies of officers and men who
had been either frozen to death or had fallen dead on the march during
Ney’s retreat after Krasnoi; they were not taken in fight.

Ney rejoined Napoleon with only 1,500 men left out of 12,000, of which
the rearguard had consisted when it left Smolensk. It was while making
his last effort to get past the Russians after his attempt to break
through at Krasnoi had failed, that Ney, overtaken on the banks of
the half-frozen Dnieper on the evening before he risked his perilous
crossing, and summoned by the Russians to surrender, made that proudly
defiant reply which has ever since been a treasured memory to the
French Army: “A Marshal of France never surrenders!” Six hours later
he had evaded capture and, with the remnant of his corps, was across
the river. All the world has heard how Napoleon, hopeless of seeing him
again, welcomed Ney with the words: “I have three hundred millions of
francs in the vaults of the Tuileries; I would have given them all for
Marshal Ney!”

[Sidenote: ALL KEPT TOGETHER FOR SAFETY]

The remaining Eagles had by now been assembled for preservation under
the protection of what troops of the main column, which Napoleon
accompanied, still continued under arms. Further effort to rally the
shattered host was beyond possibility. Only portions of the two army
corps of Marshals Victor and Oudinot, called in from holding the line
of communications, still retained military formation, together with
the reduced battalions of the Old Guard which had kept near Napoleon
throughout. To save the remaining Eagles, the officers of broken-up and
disbanded regiments, with some devoted soldiers who stood by them, took
personal charge of the Eagles, and carried them with their own hands.
Banding together and marching in company side by side, they tramped on,
plodding through the snow day and night for 200 miles; the collected
Eagles all massed in the centre. They attached themselves to the column
of the Old Guard, and kept their way close by Napoleon.

A survivor of the retreat from Moscow, in his memoirs, describes how he
saw Napoleon and the Eagles pass by him on the way to the Beresina on
the morning of November 25:

“Those in advance seemed to be generals, a few on horseback, but the
greater part on foot. There was also a great number of other officers,
the remnant of the Doomed Squadron and Battalion, formed on the 22nd
and barely existing at the end of three days. Those on foot dragged
themselves painfully along, almost all of them having their feet frozen
and wrapped in rags or in bits of sheep’s-skin, and all nearly dying of
hunger. Afterwards came the small remains of the Cavalry of the Guard.
The Emperor came next, on foot, and carrying a staff. He wore a large
cloak lined with fur, and had a red velvet cap with black-fox fur on
his head. Murat walked on foot at his right, and on his left the Prince
Eugène, Viceroy of Italy. Next came the Marshals Berthier--Prince of
Neufchatel--Ney, Mortier, Lefebvre, with other marshals and generals
whose corps had been annihilated.

“The Emperor mounted a horse as soon as he had passed; so did a few of
those with him: the greater part of them had no horses to ride. Seven
or eight hundred officers and non-commissioned officers followed,
walking in order and perfect silence, and carrying the Eagles of their
different regiments, which had so often led them to victory. This was
all that remained of 60,000 men.

“After them came the Imperial Guard on foot, marching also in order.”

Four Eagles were lost in the fighting at the passage of the
Beresina, where a whole division of Marshal Victor’s corps (General
Partonneaux’s) was cut off and compelled to surrender. On the last
night, when either massacre under the Russian guns or laying down their
arms was all that was left to them, they broke up and buried their
Eagles in the ground underneath the snow. The officers of one regiment,
it is told, broke up their Eagle before burying it, burned the flag
at their last bivouac fire, mixed the ashes with thawed snow, and
swallowed the concoction.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AND THE “SACRED SQUADRON” ON THE WAY TO THE
BERESINA.

From the picture by H. Bellangé.]

[Sidenote: WHEN THE LAST HOPE WAS GONE]

The little column of officers with their Eagles passed the Beresina
with the Guard, and thus escaped that last catastrophe, the crowning
horror of the bridge disaster, when 24,000 ill-fated human beings were
sent to their account; either killed in the fighting with the Russians,
or drowned in the river, jammed together on the burning bridge, while
the Russian guns from the rear thundered on them with shot and shell.

The officer-escort with the Eagles tramped on until Wilna was reached;
until after Napoleon had left the army and set off for Paris. Then,
on the final falling apart of the remnants of the stricken host,
the officers themselves dispersed, to escape as best they could
individually and get to the Niemen; breaking up the Eagle-poles and
concealing the Eagles and flags in knapsacks or under their uniforms.
The dispersal, says one officer, was at Napoleon’s own instance. “He
ordered all the officers who had no troops to make the best of their
way at once to the Niemen, considering that their services had best be
saved for the future army he was going to Paris to raise and organise.”
That is one story. According to another officer, utter despair at
their frightful position, abandoned by their chief, was the cause of
the break-up at Wilna and the final _débâcle_. “Until then a few armed
soldiers, led by their officers, had still rallied round the Eagles.
Now, however, the officers began to break away, and the soldiers became
fewer and fewer, and those left were finally reduced, of necessity,
some to conceal the Eagles in knapsacks, others to make away with
them.” Some of the officers fell dead on the way to the Niemen, struck
down suddenly by the cold, and their Eagles remained with them. Others
who died, with their last strength tried to put their charges beyond
reach of the enemy by scraping or digging holes in the frozen ground,
and burying the Eagles.[34]

[Sidenote: THE EAGLE OF THE OLD GUARD]

The Eagle of the Old Guard recrossed the Niemen at Kovno, while Ney
was making his final stand, defending the gate of the town; the
marshal fighting musket in hand at the last, with less than twenty
soldiers. That Eagle was still carried openly--the only one still so
displayed--carried defiantly aloft on its staff, borne to the last with
its escort in military formation, in the midst of the ranks of the 400
men of the Old Guard who were all that were able to reach the frontier.


AT BAY IN NORTHERN GERMANY--1813

There were yet dark days in store for the Eagles after the retreat from
Moscow was over. The tale of their misfortunes was not yet ended. There
was yet to be the sequel to the great catastrophe; further humiliations
in the War in Germany of 1813, and the Winter Campaign of 1814 in
Eastern France, which followed as the consequence and result of the
overthrow in Russia.

No fewer than fifteen of the Eagles that the devotion of their officers
brought through the retreat from Moscow are now--making allowance for
difficulties of identification, owing to defective records--among
the trophies of victory to be seen at Berlin and Potsdam, in Vienna,
and also at St. Petersburg. Those in Germany are mostly kept in the
Garrison Church of Potsdam, suspended triumphantly above the vault in
which lies the sarcophagus of Frederick the Great. They were placed
there of set purpose as an act of retribution, as a votive offering
to the _manes_ of the Great Frederick; as a Prussian rejoinder to
Napoleon’s act of wanton desecration after Jena. The four trophy Eagles
at Vienna are in the Imperial Arsenal Museum there. Two of them are the
spoils of Kulm; displayed together with the keys of Lyons, Langres,
Troyes, and the fortress of Mayence, which were surrendered during the
march of the Allies on Paris. The Russian trophy Eagles of 1813 are at
St. Petersburg, displayed with the Eagles which fell into Russian hands
in the retreat from Moscow.

What the annihilation of the Grand Army in Russia meant for Europe,
with what dramatic rapidity its import for the vassal states of
Napoleon was realised and turned to account, is a familiar story.
Prussia led the revolt at once, and all Northern Germany rose in arms
_en masse_ to commence the “War of Liberation,” joining hands with
Russia as the pursuing armies of the Czar crossed the frontier. Then
Austria, after negotiations rendered abortive at the last by Napoleon’s
infatuated pride and overweening self-confidence, threw her sword into
the balance and turned the scale decisively against France. Napoleon’s
hastily raised conscript levies, outnumbered and outmanœuvred, were
defeated on battlefield after battlefield, and driven in rout across
the Rhine to their final surrender at the gates of Paris; and then came
the abdication of Fontainebleau.

[Sidenote: THE EAGLES DIED HARD]

Yet, with all that, in those dark hours of their fate the Eagles died
hard. The trophy-collections of Berlin, Vienna, and St. Petersburg
testify to that. Only a percentage of the Eagles which faced their fate
on the battlefield became spoils to the victors. Marshal Macdonald’s
army, routed by Blücher on the Katzbach, thanks to the devotion of
the regimental officers and some of their men, saved all its Eagles
from the enemy except three. Ney’s army, no less roughly handled at
Dennewitz, managed to retain in like manner all its Eagles except
three. Vandamme’s army, annihilated and dispersed at Kulm, saved its
Eagles all but two. Oudinot was routed at Gross Beeren, with the
loss of guns and many prisoners; Gérard underwent the same fate near
Magdeburg; Bertrand was surprised and defeated with heavier losses
still; but not one Eagle was left as spoil of these disasters in the
hands of the victorious foe.

In one battle the Eagle of Napoleon’s Irish Legion was only just kept
from being to-day among the trophies displayed in the Garrison Church
of Potsdam over the tomb of Frederick the Great. It was immediately
after Macdonald’s defeat on the Katzbach. The Irish Legion was one
of the regiments in one of Macdonald’s divisions, that of General
Puthod. They had had a hard fight of it, and their retreat was barred
by the river Bober in flood. Under stress of the continuous attacks
of the Prussians in ever-increasing force, the 12,000 men of Puthod’s
Division had been reduced to barely 5,000. They had used up their
last cartridges, and had been driven back to the river-bank, where
the Prussian army closed in on them “in a half-moon.” The Prussians
halted for one moment until they realised that the troops before them
had no more ammunition. Then, aware that they had their foe at their
mercy, they rushed forward, cheering exultantly, to deliver the _coup
de grâce_. “All of a sudden,” describes an Irish officer, “30,000 men
ran forward on their prey, of whom none but those who knew how to swim
could attempt to escape.” The greater number of the French, all the
same, jumped into the river, and took the risk of drowning rather than
surrender. Less than five hundred got across the stream, and after
that they had to wade waist-deep for half a mile over flooded marshes
under a pitiless fire from the Prussian batteries. In the end only 150
men reached dry ground alive. Among the survivors were just 40 men of
the Irish Legion, with their Eagle--Colonel Ware, eight officers, the
Eagle-bearer, and thirty privates. The Irish remnant made their way
eventually to Dresden, and reported themselves to Napoleon.

[Sidenote: THE IRISH EAGLE’S FIRST ESCAPE]

That adventure, by the way, was the Irish Eagle’s second escape from
falling into an enemy’s hands since Napoleon presented it to the Legion
on the Field of Mars. On the first occasion it came within an ace of
being now among our British trophy Eagles at Chelsea; of, indeed,
being the first Napoleonic Eagle to be brought as spoil of war to
England. The Irish Legion was in garrison at Flushing in 1809, when the
fortress surrendered to the British Walcheren Expedition. On the night
before the final capitulation, Major Lawless of the Irish Legion took
charge of the Eagle, and in a rowing-boat made a risky passage among
the British ships of war in front of the batteries. He escaped up the
Scheldt to Antwerp, where he delivered the Eagle personally to Marshal
Bernadotte. Napoleon sent for the major to Paris, decorated him for
saving the Eagle, with the Cross of the Legion of Honour, and promoted
him lieutenant-colonel.

In the disaster on the Bober also, a soldier of the 134th of the Line
saved the Eagle of another regiment, the 147th. The two regiments, as
the Prussians charged down on them after their cartridges gave out, in
desperation rushed to meet their assailants with the bayonet. They were
overpowered and hurled back in confusion to the bank of the river, all
intermingled in the _mêlée_. The Eagle-bearer of the 147th fell dead,
shot down, and a Prussian officer made for the Eagle. A soldier of the
134th bayoneted the officer as he got to it, picked up the Eagle, and,
seeing only more Prussians round him, flung himself, still holding on
to the Eagle, into the river. The man could not swim, and was fired at
as he floundered in the water, but he was not hit. Unable to reach the
other side, he somehow got on to a shallow patch, and, still holding
fast to the Eagle, kept his footing there, until, to get away from
the hail of bullets all round him, he again risked drowning by trying
to drift downstream. He managed to keep his head above water, and got
over to a bed of rushes, fringing the farther bank. Creeping in there,
still holding on closely to the Eagle, the brave fellow hid for six
hours until dark, embedded in mud to his armpits most of the time.
After nightfall he worked his way through and crawled ashore. Finally,
after wandering across country for eight days, feeding on berries and
what he could pick up, in constant peril of discovery among the hostile
peasants and parties of Prussian dragoons scouring the district, the
heroic soldier at length found his way to Dresden. There he was brought
before Marshal Berthier, to whom he delivered the Eagle.

[Sidenote: AT THE COST OF HIS LIFE]

At the battle of the Katzbach the colonel of the 132nd of the Line
threw away his life under the mistaken impression that he saw the
Eagle of his regiment captured by the enemy. He was short-sighted, and
suddenly missed it in the middle of a charge. Thinking he saw the Eagle
being carried off by a party of Prussians he rode straight through
the enemy at them, to fall mortally wounded halfway, with his horse
shot beneath him. Some of the men saw the colonel fall, and charged
after him. They got to him and carried him off the field, and in the
retreat until a place of safety was reached, where the survivors of the
regiment had rallied. There the officers came round to bid farewell to
their dying chief. The Eagle-bearer of the regiment was among them,
and he, to the amazement of all, produced the Eagle from his havresac,
broken from its staff, and held it up before the eyes of the dying
colonel. No enemy’s hand, he declared, had contaminated it. Finding
himself and the Eagle, he explained, in imminent danger of capture, he
had wrenched the Eagle off the staff and hidden it--his act causing the
disappearance which the colonel had marked, and which had resulted in
his fatal dash among the enemy.

The 17th of the Line saved their Eagle and themselves after Vandamme’s
defeat at Kulm, and made their way to safety, as one of the officers
relates, after an extraordinary series of adventures. They had joined
Vandamme’s army at the beginning of the first day’s fighting--the
battle lasted three days--coming in after a week’s march from Dresden,
through pouring rain most of the time. They numbered four battalions,
4,000 men in all. Vandamme was successful on the first two days and
the 17th by themselves routed an Austrian regiment and captured a gun.
On the evening of the second day the French advanced again, driving
the enemy before them into the valley of Kulm. They bivouacked on the
ground they had won, anticipating a final triumph on the morrow. But
during that night two Russian and Prussian army corps reinforced the
Austrian columns unknown to the French.

One of the officers of the 17th, Major Fantin des Odoards, during the
night had his suspicions aroused about the enemy, and made a discovery;
but Vandamme would not listen to him.

He was unable to sleep, says Major Fantin, and, learning from a patrol
that mysterious sounds were being heard in the direction in which the
Austrians had retreated, he left the bivouac and went out alone beyond
the outposts, to creep in the dark towards the Austrian watch-fires.
At times, as he crawled forward, describes the major, he lay flat and
listened with his ear to the ground. In the end he felt certain that
he heard the tramp and stir of a vast number of men, and also the
rumble of artillery wheels moving across the front. Apparently, from
the direction the unseen troops were taking, they were marching to cut
off the retreat of the army from Dresden, Napoleon’s base of operations
throughout the campaign.

Major Fantin returned to the bivouac and went at once to report to the
general, finding him asleep. He aroused Vandamme and told what he had
heard and suspected; only, however, to be rebuffed and rudely answered
that he was quite mistaken. Vandamme, a surly and ill-conditioned boor
to deal with at all times, awoke in a vile temper. “You are a fool!”
was what he said in reply. “If the enemy are on the move at all, they
are in retreat, trying to escape me. To-morrow will see them flying, or
my prisoners.” With that Vandamme terminated the interview, and turned
over and went to sleep again.

[Sidenote: HEMMED IN ON EVERY SIDE]

He found out his mistake all too soon. Daylight disclosed dense swarms
of Austrians, Prussians, and Russians in front of Vandamme, on his
flanks, and closing on his rear; outnumbering him nearly four to one.
It was a desperate position, for the only road by which Vandamme
might retreat was held by the enemy. Little time was left to him to
deliberate what to do. He was in the act of forming up his columns in
a mass to try to fight his way through, when the enemy attacked in
overpowering force. Before noon that day, out of 30,000 men, 10,000 had
fallen. Seven thousand more were wounded or prisoners. The rest were
fugitives, flying for shelter and hiding-places in the woods round
the battlefield. All the French guns and baggage had been taken, and
Vandamme himself was a prisoner, together with many officers of rank.
The “annals of modern warfare record few instances of defeat more
complete than that of Vandamme at Kulm.”

The only regiment that kept its order was the 17th, and it before
the crisis had lost heavily. Its colonel and two of the _chefs de
bataillon_ had been killed; the two others were wounded. Only some
1,700 of the 4,000 men remained. It rested with Major Fantin, as senior
officer, to save those that were left and the Eagle.

The 17th were on the extreme right of the battle, where they had been
posted as support to Vandamme’s artillery. They held their ground as
long as possible, but the enemy closed in on them, overlapping them
on both flanks, and then stormed and captured the guns. The 17th were
isolated and in imminent peril--surrender or destruction were the only
alternatives before them.

[Sidenote: “EN HAUT L’AIGLE!”]

Looking round, the major, as he describes, marked a wooded hill some
little way off, and decided to make for that. There was just time
to get away before the enemy closed in on them. He sent off all
his tirailleurs, about 400 men, to skirmish and hold in check the
advancing Austrians. As they went off he shouted to the rest: “En haut
l’Aigle! Ralliement au drapeau!” (“Display the Eagle! All rally to the
standard!”) The men of the regiment formed round him quickly, and the
major pointed out the wooded hill to them with his sword. “All of you
disperse at once,” he told them, “and make your way there as quickly
as you can. You will find the Eagle of the regiment there, and me with
it!” The 17th broke up and scattered, and, under the protection of the
skirmishers, aided by the opportune mist which hung low over the ground
after the heavy rains of the past week, they made off in groups in
the direction pointed out. All just got past the enemy in time, Major
Fantin and two officers accompanying the Eagle.

An hour later, “_nos débris_,” as the major puts it, were straggling up
the hill, where they again rallied round the Eagle. The skirmishers,
cleverly withdrawn at the right moment, evaded the enemy also, and
most of them joined their comrades on the hill, where all silently
drew together. They then moved off, to halt for concealment in a
wooded glade behind. They stayed there, keeping quiet and lying down
beside their arms, for several hours; off the track of the pursuit,
and undiscovered by the enemy. “We were all very hungry and without
anything but what cartridges we had still left.”

At nightfall they moved away in the direction in which Dresden was
judged to be, without having a single map or anything to guide them.
They marched all night, mostly by a forest road, and keeping their
direction by means of occasional glimpses of the stars seen through
rifts in the cloudy sky overhead. More than once they had to halt
as the enemy were heard on the move not far off. They groped their
way forward with extreme caution, not a light being struck, and the
necessary words of command being spoken in an undertone, until after
midnight. Then they suddenly came into the open round a bend of the
road, and discovered, not half a mile off in front, the numerous
watch-fires of a large body of troops. “The column halted at the sight
like one man and stood in absolute silence. Who were those in front of
us? Friends or the enemy?”

Two scouts were sent forward to try to find out. They were away for
half an hour; an interval of intense suspense and anxiety to the
others. At the end of the time the two scouts came rushing back. They
brought unexpectedly good news. It was a French bivouac: that of the
14th Army Corps--Marshal St. Cyr’s. So the 17th and their Eagle were
saved.

Other Eagles that got away from the rout at Kulm and rejoined the army
owed their safety to the determination of small groups of officers and
men who cut their way through the enemy. “Officers fought with their
swords, privates with their bayonets and the butts of their muskets:
and as the struggle was to escape and not to destroy, a push and
wrestle, or a blow, which might suffice to throw the individual struck
out of the way of the striker, prevented in many instances the more
deadly thrust.” Finally, as the 17th had done, they found shelter among
the woods and ravines of the neighbourhood, and lay low there until the
enemy had moved off towards Töplitz, whereupon they made their way to
Dresden. The cavalry saved their Eagles by cutting their way through
the enemy. They suffered heavy losses, but succeeded in their effort.
Their commander, General Corbineau, “presented himself, wounded and
covered with blood, before Napoleon”; it was his arrival that announced
the disaster. The Eagles of the 33rd and the 106th of the Line taken at
Kulm are at Vienna.

[Sidenote: THE EAGLE-TROPHIES OF LEIPSIC]

The three days of battle at Leipsic, between October 16 and 19,
1813, cost Napoleon 60,000 men in killed, wounded, and prisoners,
and 300 guns; but not more than 6 Eagles were among the trophies of
battalion-flags and squadron-colours taken or found on the field, now
at Berlin, Vienna, and St. Petersburg.

One Eagle was lost during the first day’s fighting at Leipsic--taken
on the 16th by Blücher from Ney’s corps; but no others were lost until
the end. The 80,000 men who were able to make good their retreat with
Napoleon across the bridge over the Elster before it was prematurely
blown up, through a non-commissioned officer’s blunder, carried their
Eagles with them. What colour-trophies came into the possession of
the Allies were taken amid the final scenes of carnage; from cut-off
battalions of the three divisions left behind on the right bank of
the river, victims of the destruction of the bridge. They were mostly
captured in the ferocious hand-to-hand fighting which marked the
closing phase of the battle in the suburbs of Leipsic. The French
defended themselves there to the last with the courage of despair among
the fortified villas and loopholed garden walls. “Pressed upon by
superior numbers, and fighting, now in the streets, now in the houses,
now through gardens or other enclosures, the single end which they
could accomplish or which in point of fact they seemed to desire, was
that they might sell their lives at the dearest rate possible.” Two at
least of the Eagles now at Berlin were hastily buried in gardens during
the last stand, and were dug up there later when the ground was being
turned over.

[Sidenote: AMIDST THE ROUT AT LEIPSIC]

Forced to give back before their ever-increasing enemies, not a few
of the French “preferred death to captivity, and fought to the last.
These, retiring through by-lanes and covered passages, made their way
to the river, some where the ruins of the bridge covered its banks,
some above and others below that point, and, plunging into the deep
water, endeavoured to gain the opposite shore by swimming, an attempt
in which comparatively few succeeded.”

The three doomed divisions of Lauriston, Regnier, and Poniatowski, who
were cut off by the blowing up of the bridge, had, as it happened,
not many Eagles among them to lose. They were largely made up of
newly raised conscript regiments to whom Napoleon had not yet awarded
Eagles; regiments not yet entitled to carry Eagles, according to the
later regulations that Napoleon had laid down. Only four of the newly
raised regiments altogether, so far during the campaign in Germany,
had qualified for the honour. They had received their Eagles with the
customary ceremony at the hands of Napoleon: three of them on October
15, the day before the battle of Leipsic opened. The fourth had
received its Eagle at Dresden a month earlier. Two of these four Eagles
only were lost to the enemy at Leipsic.

The Eagle-bearers of four or five other regiments among those cut off
by the bridge disaster tried to swim across the Elster with their
Eagles. Their fate is unknown; probably they were drowned in the
attempt. Other Eagle-bearers, before surrendering, were seen to fling
their Eagles into the river to sink there.

How one Eagle, during the battle on the 18th, was momentarily lost, and
then regained by a splendid act of valour, is told by Caulaincourt,
who was on Napoleon’s staff, and witnessed the gallant deed that
won the Eagle back. In the midst of the fighting, a number of Saxon
regiments abandoned Napoleon’s cause and went over _en masse_ to
the enemy. To signalise their defection they turned on the nearest
French regiment and mobbed it; attacking it at close quarters with
the bayonet. Thrown into confusion by the unexpected onslaught, the
French were for the moment broken and forced back, whereupon the
Saxons, making for the Eagle, got possession of it. “A young officer of
Hussars,” relates Caulaincourt, “whose name I forget, rushed headlong
into the enemies’ ranks. In the charge some of the miserable renegades
had carried off one of our Eagles. The gallant young officer rescued
it, but at the cost of his life. He threw the Eagle at the Emperor’s
feet, and then he himself fell, mortally wounded and bathed in blood.
The Emperor was deeply moved. ‘With such men,’ he exclaimed, ‘what
resources does not France possess!’”

The regiments left by Napoleon to garrison the fortresses in Germany,
at Stettin, at Magdeburg, Torgau, Dantzic, and elsewhere, previous to
surrendering took steps to prevent their Eagles falling into the hands
of their adversaries. In every case they destroyed them, smashing
the Eagles into small fragments, which were either distributed among
officers and men, or else thrown into the ditch of the fortress. In
more than one case they melted the Eagles down, and broke up and
buried the metal, while the flags were burned.

[Sidenote: KEPT FROM THE HANDS OF THE FOE]

At Dresden, where Marshal St. Cyr had to surrender, a month after
Leipsic, the terms granted by the Austrian general conducting the siege
allowed the troops to return to France with their arms, their baggage,
and their Eagles, seven in number. Superior authority, however,
cancelled the privilege. The garrison had already started on their
march when, to their utter consternation, the capitulation was abruptly
annulled by the Austrian Generalissimo, Schwartzenberg, with the result
that the hapless troops were compelled to yield themselves prisoners
at discretion. The soldiers were defenceless and could only submit to
their hard fate. They did not, however, let their seven Eagles pass
into the enemy’s hands. Five of the seven were broken up, and the flags
torn to pieces and divided among the regiments. Two of the Eagles,
those of the 25th of the Line and the 85th, were concealed intact by
two officers, who kept them from discovery for months, while they were
prisoners in Hungary. After the Peace, in the following year, they
brought them back to France--to meet there the doom that awaited all
the Eagles of Napoleon of which the officials of the Bourbon _régime_
got possession.

One memento of the Winter Campaign in Eastern France is now at the
Invalides--the Eagle of the 5th of the Line. It was found in the
river Aube at Arcis after the battle there, which, in its result,
decided the fate of Napoleon; its outcome being the immediate march of
the Allied armies on Paris. The 5th was one of the regiments of the
rearguard column, under Oudinot, half of which was drowned in the river
in trying to get across at night, after stubbornly holding out in the
town all the afternoon in order to enable Napoleon to cross the river
in safety. The 5th was one of the regiments that sacrificed themselves.
Its Eagle-bearer was among the drowned, and his Eagle sank with him. It
remained in the bed of the stream until long afterwards, when it was
accidentally discovered, and fished up.

The 132nd of the Line of the modern army of France commemorates on its
flag a feat of arms done under the Eagle of the old 132nd of Napoleon’s
Army, after having been saved from the Prussians at the Katzbach,
and again at Leipsic. It was in one of the fights in the closing
campaign in Eastern France. The proud legend inscribed in golden
letters, “Rosny, 1814: Un contre huit,” commemorates how the regiment,
single-handed, held at bay and beat off an enemy eight times its force,
saving itself for the third time, and its Eagle.

[Sidenote: THE GRAND ARMY’S LAST PARADE]

The surviving Eagles of the war, the last to face the enemy in the
north of those presented on the Field of Mars, paid their last salute
to the War Lord at Napoleon’s final review of the remnants of the
Grand Army at Rheims on March 15, 1814.

A pitiful, a moving, sight was that hapless military spectacle: the
closing parade before Napoleon of his last remaining soldiers.

This is how Alison describes it: “How different from the splendid
military spectacles of the Tuileres or Chammartin, which had so often
dazzled his sight with the pomp of apparently irresistible power!
Wasted away to half the numbers which they possessed when they crossed
the Marne a fortnight before, the greater part of the regiments
exhibited only the skeletons of military array. In some, more officers
than privates were to be seen in the ranks; in all, the appearance
of the troops, the haggard air of the men, their worn-out uniforms,
and the strange motley of which they were composed, bespoke the total
exhaustion of the Empire. It was evident to all that Napoleon was
expending his last resources. Besides the veterans of the Guard--the
iron men whom nothing could daunt, but whose tattered garments and
soiled accoutrements bespoke the dreadful fatigue to which they had
been subjected--were to be seen young conscripts, but recently torn
from the embraces of maternal love, and whose wan visages and faltering
steps told but too clearly that they were unequal to the weight of the
arms they bore. The gaunt figures and woeful aspect of the horses,
the broken carriages and blackened mouths of the guns, the crazy and
fractured artillery wagons which defiled past, the general confusion
of arms, battalions, and uniforms, even in the best appointed corps,
spoke of the mere remains of the vast military army which had so long
stood triumphant against the world in arms. The soldiers exhibited none
of their ancient enthusiasm as they defiled past the Emperor; silent
and sad they took their way before him: the stern realities of war had
chased away its enthusiastic ardour. All felt that in this dreadful
contest they themselves would perish, happy if they had not previously
witnessed the degradation of France!”[35]

What is indeed the most interesting of all the Eagles, the most famous
battle-standard in the world, which for a time was at the Invalides, is
at present preserved in private hands in Paris--the Eagle of Napoleon’s
Old Guard, the Eagle of the “Adieu of Fontainebleau.” It is treasured
with devoted care in the family of the officer who commanded the
Grenadiers of the Guard in the retreat from Moscow, at Fontainebleau,
and at Waterloo--General Petit. It is kept in the house, in Paris, in
which the old general died, in the room he used as his _salon_. General
Petit refused to be parted from the Eagle of his regiment during his
lifetime; he kept it with him wherever he went, always in his personal
care. It was at the Invalides while General Petit was in residence
there as Governor of the Hospital.

[Sidenote: THE OLD GUARD AT FONTAINEBLEAU]

On that never-to-be-forgotten April forenoon of 1814, in the Court of
the White Horse of the Château of Fontainebleau, Napoleon embraced the
standard, and taking the Eagle in his hands, kissed it in front of the
veteran Grenadiers of the Old Guard. His travelling carriage, to convey
the fallen Emperor on the first stage of his journey to Elba, was in
waiting, close by, ready to start. Twelve hundred Grenadiers of the
Guard stood with presented arms all round the courtyard; drawn up in a
great hollow square as a guard of honour to render to the master they
adored the parting salute.

Napoleon passed slowly round the square and inspected the ranks, man
by man, looking intently into the scarred and war-worn, weather-beaten
old faces, each one of which was familiar to him. Their station on
every battlefield had been close at hand to where he took up his post.
Night after night, in every campaign from Austerlitz to those last
dreadful weeks, he had slept in their midst; his tent always pitched
in the centre of the camp of the Imperial Guard. That had been
Napoleon’s invariable custom in war. They had shared with him that
last forlorn-hope march to save Paris, until, completely worn out and
footsore, exhausted nature forbade their attempting to go farther. With
tears streaming from their eyes the old soldiers, before whose bayonets
in the charge no Continental foe had ever stood, mutely returned
Napoleon’s last wistful, pathetic look of farewell.

He addressed a few touching words to them, standing in the centre of
the square. Next he turned to General Petit, near at hand, and before
them he took the general in his arms, as representing all, and kissed
him on the cheek. “I cannot embrace you all,” exclaimed Napoleon in a
voice broken with emotion, yet which all could hear distinctly, “so I
embrace your General!” Then he motioned to the Porte-Aigle, standing
all the while before him, with the Eagle held in the attitude of salute.

“Bring me the Eagle,” he said, “that I may embrace it also!” “Que
m’apporte l’Aigle, que je l’embrasse aussi!” were Napoleon’s words.

The Porte-Aigle advanced and again inclined the Eagle forward to the
Emperor. Napoleon took hold of it, embraced and kissed it three times,
tears in his eyes, and displaying the deepest emotion.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON’S FAREWELL TO THE OLD GUARD AT FONTAINEBLEAU.

From a print after H. Vernet, kindly lent by Messrs. T. H. Parker, 45,
Whitcomb Street.]

“Ah, chère Aigle,” he exclaimed, “que les baisers que je te donne
retentissent dans la postérité.”

The Eagle-bearer then stepped back a pace.

“Adieu, mes enfants! Adieu, mes braves! Entourez moi encore une fois!”
were Napoleon’s closing words as the historic scene terminated.

The old soldiers all stood utterly broken down, weeping bitter tears,
overcome with grief, as Napoleon made his way to the carriage; the
members of the Household bowing low as he passed, and kissing his hand,
were all also in tears.

Finally, amid a mournful cry of “Vive l’Empereur!” Napoleon drove away.

[Sidenote: ASHES MINGLED WITH WINE]

As soon as Napoleon’s carriage was beyond the precincts, the Grenadiers
of the Guard solemnly lowered the Imperial Standard, flying above the
Château. There, in the courtyard, they burned it. Then, mixing the
ashes in a barrel of wine that was brought out, they handed round the
liquor in bowls and drank off the draught, pledging Napoleon with cries
of “Vive l’Empereur!” So it is related by one who was an eye-witness
and a partaker; one of the officers of the Old Guard.

Kept safely in concealment for ten months by General Petit, during
the Bourbon Restoration period in 1814, the Eagle of the Old Guard
appeared once more after the return from Elba. It faced the enemy for
the last time at Waterloo. Something of that will be said further on.
General Petit kept close beside it all through the retreat, during that
night of horror after Waterloo; a faithful band of devoted veterans
accompanying him and surrounding the Eagle. So it made its final return
to France, to be preserved for the rest of his life by the man who,
above all others, had most right to be custodian of the Eagle of the
Old Guard.

The Bourbon War Minister ordered it to be given up, to be burned
at the artillery dépôt at Vincennes with the other Eagles that the
Restoration officials were able to get hold of. General Petit flatly
and indignantly refused to part with the Eagle of the Old Guard. He was
able, as before, to conceal it successfully, in spite of every effort
to discover its whereabouts, until after the Revolution of 1830. Then,
at the last, it was safe.

[Sidenote: THE FLAG OF THE OLD GUARD]

Faded and frayed away in parts, the gold embroidery on it dulled and
tarnished from the lapse of years, and torn here and there round the
jagged bullet-holes in the silk, is now, in its old age, the Flag of
the Old Guard. As it was at first--as it was when it made its débût at
the opening of its career, on that December afternoon on the Field of
Mars--the flag is of rich crimson silk, fringed with gold, sprinkled
over on both sides with golden bees, and with, at the corners,
encircled in golden laurel-wreaths, the Imperial cypher, the letter
“N.” In shape it was--and of course is still--almost a square: a metre
deep, vertically, on the staff, and some half-dozen inches more than
that lengthwise, horizontally, in the fly. On one side, in the centre,
the Napoleonic Eagle is displayed, a gold embroidered Eagle poised on a
thunderbolt. Inscribed round the Eagle in letters of gold is the legend:

                            “GARDE IMPÉRIALE

                          L’EMPEREUR NAPOLÉON
                         AU 1^{ER} RÉGIMENT DES
                          GRENADIERS À PIED.”

On the other side are inscribed these fifteen names of Napoleon’s great
days in war, also in golden letters: “Marengo; Ulm; Austerlitz; Jéna;
Berlin; Eylau; Friedland; Madrid; Eckmühl; Essling; Wagram; Vienna;
Smolensk; Moskowa; Moscow.”




CHAPTER XI

THAT TERRIBLE MIDNIGHT AT THE INVALIDES


The Battalion Eagles of 1804, those of the second and third battalions
withdrawn by the decree of 1808, together with the Light Cavalry
(Hussar, Chasseur, and Dragoon) Eagles recalled in the autumn of 1805,
and a number of Light Infantry Eagles returned to the Ministry of War
at the end of 1807, perished in the flames of the great holocaust of
trophy-flags at the Invalides on the night of March 30, 1814, the night
of the surrender of Paris to the Allies.

It was on that tragic Wednesday night that the great sacrifice was
made, amid the bowed and weeping old soldiers of France, the veterans
of a hundred battlefields, on the most terrible and mournful occasion
in the wide-ranging annals of the great institution which the Grand
Monarque, in the full pride of his power, at the topmost pinnacle of
his renown, founded and opened in person with grandiose martial pomp
and State display. All was over for France on that night--

     “Around a slaughtered army lay,
      No more to conquer and to bleed:
      The power and glory of the war
      Had passed to the victorious Czar.”

The two marshals charged with the defence of Paris, Marmont and
Mortier, had on that afternoon placed the submission of the capital
in the hands of Alexander of Russia on the heights of Montmartre,
whence, and from the Buttes Chaumont and the other northern heights
from right to left, 300 loaded cannon pointed threateningly down over
the vanquished and panic-stricken city, supported by the bayonets
and sabres of 120,000 men, Russians and Prussians, Bavarians,
Würtemburgers, and Austrians, flushed and exultant in their hour of
supreme triumph, the soldiers of all the nations of the Continent at
war with Napoleon.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON WITHIN TWELVE MILES]

It was at ten o’clock on that fateful night for France that the great
destruction of trophies at the Invalides took place. Napoleon had set
his last stake, had attempted his desperate last manœuvre, and had
failed. He had been foiled and baffled when within reach almost of his
goal. At that very hour indeed, only twelve miles away, he had just
been stopped in his wild midnight gallop, his final forlorn-hope effort
to reach the capital, by the news that all hope was past, that the
worst had happened, that Paris had fallen.

Only forty-eight hours before, on Monday night, at Saint-Dizier, a
small town 170 miles away, had Napoleon suddenly realised the gravity
of the catastrophe impending over Paris. He was at that moment in
the act of dealing the Allies a counter-stroke which he confidently
believed would save the situation and bring the enemy’s advance to a
general stand. Just a week before, he had abruptly turned back in his
retreat towards the capital and had boldly started to march across the
rear of the Allies in the direction of the Rhine. He would sever their
communications; he would cut the enemy off from their base. Calling out
the _levée en masse_ of the peasantry all over Eastern France, and at
the same time rallying to him the garrisons of the French fortresses
in Alsace and Lorraine, with 100,000 men at his disposal, led by Ney,
Macdonald, Victor, and Oudinot, while two other marshals, Marmont
and Mortier, held the enemy at bay in front of Paris, he was looking
forward to checkmate the Allies at the last moment and paralyse their
advance on the capital. It was a daring and masterly project; but the
Fortune of War was against Napoleon. He had sent word of his plans
to Marie Louise at the Tuileries, together with instructions to his
brother Joseph, Governor of Paris, but on the way a Cossack patrol
captured the bearer of the vitally important documents. Napoleon’s
despatch for once was not in cypher, and its full import was apparent
instantly. It was carried to the Czar Alexander, and forthwith laid
before a hastily convened Russian council of war. Another letter, taken
at the same time, laid bare the critical condition of affairs inside
Paris itself; describing how all was in confusion there, and that
treachery to the cause of the Empire was at work within the city. The
council of war decided to pay no heed to Napoleon’s counter-stroke,
and, instead, to march at once on Paris in full force. Marmont and
Mortier, it was known, could barely muster 6,000 regulars. With
Blücher’s Prussians, at that moment on the point of joining them,
the Allies could bring into line not far short of 150,000 men. This
final plan was agreed to on the afternoon of Friday, March 24, and the
general advance began at once.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON’S BLANK DISMAY]

Napoleon knew nothing of what was happening until late on the night of
the 27th, the following Monday. Then he was suddenly made aware of the
full position. “Nothing,” exclaimed the doomed Emperor in blank dismay,
“but a thunderbolt can save us now.” The Allies then had not turned
back! The enemy nearest him, whom he had planned to attack next day,
believing them to be the Russian main army, was only--he discovered
at the last moment--a cavalry division, sent back to delude him and
prevent his finding out what was really going on. And the troops
advancing on Paris were already three clear days ahead of him! Napoleon
counter-marched his whole force at once to hasten to the rescue of the
capital. They would take the route by Sens, Troyes, and Fontainebleau,
making a sweep to keep clear of the enemy’s columns, and approach
Paris by the south bank of the Seine. It was a long march of fully 180
miles, but there was no other way open. Marmont and Mortier, to whom
the news of Napoleon’s intended approach was sent off immediately, must
manage to hold out in front of the city on the north bank until the
Emperor arrived.

Fresh news, however, and yet more serious, as to the imminence of
the grave peril threatening Paris, reached Napoleon during Tuesday
night. Leaving the army to follow, he pressed forward ahead of the
troops by himself in his travelling-carriage, escorted only by the Old
Guard. They hurried forward with feverish eagerness all that night
and the next day, the men of the Guard panting along at the double in
their effort to keep up. With hardly a halt, they struggled along,
famishing--most of the men had tasted no cooked food for the past five
days--shoeless most of them, plodding and splashing barefoot through
the mud, ankle deep; under a pitiless downpour of rain all the time.
By Wednesday evening, the 30th, they had reached Troyes, after a forty
miles march without a stop. There, still worse news reached Napoleon.
Marmont and Mortier had been disastrously defeated at Meaux, and in
consequence their defence of the northern heights outside the city was
all but hopeless.

[Sidenote: AT FULL GALLOP FOR PARIS]

Napoleon, on that, abandoned his travelling-carriage for a light
post-chaise, which set off at a gallop. He must now risk a ride
practically unattended, in the desperate hope of being able to evade
hostile patrols and get by stealth into the city. Once there, he
would himself take charge of the defence. The men of the Old Guard
were left behind at Troyes. They were worn out and unable, from sheer
exhaustion, to go a step farther. Only a troop of Cuirassiers rode with
the post-chaise, and most of these had to give up and drop back as the
chaise raced forward, Napoleon himself from time to time calling from
the windows to the postillions to keep on flogging the horses and go
faster and faster. At every stopping-place to change horses the Emperor
sent off a courier to tell Paris to hold out; and at each post-house
he received still more alarming messages from the city. Now he heard
that the Empress and his little son had had to fly from Paris. Then
he learned that the whole city was in a state of complete panic, with
affrighted peasants from all round crowding in; the shops and banks all
shut; the theatres closed, a thing that had not happened even at the
height of the Reign of Terror; everywhere chaos and hopeless despair.
After that came the news that the enemy were advancing so fast that
they were expected at any moment before the City barriers.

At ten o’clock Napoleon arrived at the village of Fromenteau, near
the Fountains of Juvisy, twelve and a half miles from Paris. The
post-chaise had to stop there again for a relay of fresh horses. As it
drew up, a party of soldiers passed by, coming from the direction of
the capital. Not knowing who was in the chaise, some of them shouted
out to the occupants, Napoleon, and Caulaincourt, who had been riding
with the Emperor: “Paris has surrendered!”

The dread news struck Napoleon like a bullet between the eyes. “It is
impossible! The men are mad!” he hissed out, gripping at the cushions
of his seat. Then he turned to his companion: “Find an officer and
bring him to me!”

One rode up, as it happened, at that moment, a General Belliard.
Napoleon questioned him eagerly, and he gave the Emperor sufficient
details to leave no doubt of what had befallen. Great drops of sweat
stood on Napoleon’s forehead. He turned, quivering with excitement, to
Caulaincourt. “Do you hear that?” he ejaculated hoarsely, fixing a gaze
on his companion under the light of the lamps, the bare memory of which
made Caulaincourt shudder ever after to his dying day.

They left the chaise, and looking across the Seine Napoleon saw to
the north and east, in the direction of Villeneuve Saint-Georges, the
glare of the enemy’s watch-fires. Marshal Berthier now came up in a
second post-chaise which had been following the Emperor’s. Speaking
excitedly, Napoleon declared that he would go on to Paris. He set off
walking rapidly along the road in the dark, leaving the horses to be
put to and the post-chaise to pick him up. Berthier and Caulaincourt
attended him, and General Belliard and some dragoons followed at a few
paces behind. Napoleon rejected every remonstrance and refused to turn
back. “I asked them,” exclaimed Napoleon, talking half to himself, half
to his companions, “to hold out for only twenty-four hours! Miserable
wretches! Marmont swore that he would be cut to pieces rather than
yield! And Joseph ran away: my own brother! To surrender the capital
to the enemy: what poltroons!” So he went on in a breathless torrent
of words. He added finally: “They have capitulated: betrayed their
country; betrayed their Emperor; degraded France! It is too terrible!
Every one has lost his head! When I am not there they do nothing but
add blunder to blunder.”

[Sidenote: “MISERABLE WRETCHES!”]

But to go on, with Paris in the hands of an army of 150,000 men,
was out of the question. Napoleon had to bow to the inevitable. He
at length yielded to the protests of the others. He stopped beside
the Fountains of Juvisy. “He sat down on the parapet of one of the
fountains,” described Labédoyère, an eye-witness, “and remained above
a quarter of an hour with his head resting on his hands, lost in the
most painful reflections.” Then he rose, went back to the post-chaise,
and, telling General Belliard to rally all the men he could at Essonne,
set off to drive to Fontainebleau. He reached there at six next morning.

Between ten o’clock on Wednesday night and six o’clock on Thursday
morning the tragedy at the Invalides was enacted. Its opening scene
took place just as Napoleon’s post-chaise was drawing up in the village
of Fromenteau. Its final scene took place just as the post-chaise was
entering the courtyard of Fontainebleau.

The Capitulation of Paris was signed before the Barrier of La Villette
at five in the afternoon. Its first article laid down that the French
army must evacuate Paris within twelve hours: before five o’clock next
morning. The last clause recommended the city to the mercy of the
Allied Sovereigns, and of the Czar Alexander in particular.

All day long the booming of cannon and rattle of musketry had dinned
in the ears of the trembling and terrified Parisians, ever steadily
drawing nearer. The marshals, Marmont and Mortier, had made their last
stand, and, resisting desperately to the last, in a struggle in which
the Allies lost two to every one of the defenders, so ferocious was the
contest, had been beaten back into the city. They carried back with
them, so gallantly had they counter-attacked at one point, the standard
of the Second Squadron of the Russian Garde du Corps--now a trophy in
the present collection at the Invalides.

[Sidenote: BEYOND ALL HOPE NOW]

The outnumbered and exhausted troops could make no further fight,
although, to the end, many of the soldiers were for holding out to
the last cartridge. The _Générale_ had beaten to arms at two in the
morning; at six, with sunrise, the enemy’s guns opened fire; from then
until late in the afternoon the fighting had gone on incessantly.

All was over by four o’clock. From east to west, from Charenton and
Belleville, right round to Neuilly, the Allies, the Russians, Blücher’s
Prussians, and the Austrians, had captured every position capable of
defence, one after the other, by sheer weight of numbers, and had
carried at the point of the bayonet every place of vantage held by the
French. Woronzeff and the Prince of Würtemburg had stormed Romainville,
La Villette, and La Chapelle. Langeron and the Russian Imperial Guard
were masters of the heights of Montmartre and the Buttes Chaumont,
looking down directly on Paris. Eighty-six guns had been taken from the
marshals since the morning; nearly six thousand soldiers and National
Guards had fallen, killed or wounded, facing the foe. A six-miles
long line of batteries and battalions on the side of the Allies had
closed in to within short musket range of the Paris barriers. Already
the Russian cannon were opening fire on the city, and their shells
were bursting over the central streets of Paris; falling, some in the
Chaussée d’Antin and on the Boulevard des Italiens.

At four o’clock Marmont, who had been the soul of the defence,
fighting, now on horseback, now on foot, using his sword at times--“the
marshal was seen everywhere in the thickest of the fight, a dozen or
more soldiers were bayoneted at his side, and his hat was riddled
with bullets”--at four o’clock Marmont repassed within the barriers
to announce that further defence was impossible. He was scarcely
recognisable, we are told--“he had a beard of eight days’ growth; the
great-coat which covered his uniform was in tatters; from head to foot
he was blackened with powder-smoke.” Then had to be done the only thing
that was left to do. Marmont and Mortier held a hasty conference, and
after it a trumpeter and an aide de camp carrying a white flag rode out
through the firing line to the nearest advanced post of the Allies. The
officer was taken before the Czar Alexander on the plateau of Chaumont,
and Paris surrendered. The last sounds that were heard on the French
side as the firing ceased came from a battalion of the Imperial Guard
which had been serving under Marmont, from a scanty remnant of veterans
stubbornly resisting at bay to the last--shouts of “Vive l’Empereur!”

[Sidenote: THE FLAG OF THE POLYTECHNIC]

The old pensioners of the Invalides manfully did their duty, and bore
their part in the defence all day, as well as they were able. All
who could carry a musket had gone out to the barriers; others did
their best by helping to bring up ammunition. Most of them fought
at the Barrière du Trône on the Vincennes road, assisting the brave
lads of the Polytechnic School to hold the post and man a battery of
eight-and-twenty cannon in front of the barrier; until a headlong
charge of Russian cavalry, Pahlen’s dragoons with some Cossacks,
swooped down from the flank, annihilating the devoted band of gunners.
Those of the boys who were left, however, saved the school flag,
presented to the Polytechnic just ten years before by the Emperor with
his own hand, on the Day of the Eagles on the Field of Mars. With the
Invalides’ veterans and some of the National Guards, the survivors
held the barrier throughout the day to the end, beating back repeated
attempts of the Russians to storm the gate. The lads, finally, after
learning that Marmont had capitulated, made their way back to the
school, and there burned their precious standard to save it from
falling into the enemy’s hands. Those who were left of the veterans
hastened back to the Invalides at the same time, overcome with anxiety
to learn what was to happen to their own priceless treasures within the
Hospital, the trophy flags. There were at the Invalides at that time,
by one account, 1417 trophy flags; according to another account--which
included apparently in the total the returned Battalion and Light
Infantry and Cavalry Eagles--altogether 1,800 standards.

Within the walls of the Invalides all was deep gloom and hopeless
despondency among those in charge. Even at nightfall, as it would
appear, the authorities had not made up their minds how the trophies
were to be disposed of.

It is a hapless and pitiful story from first to last. Some time
previously, while the Allied armies were still being kept at bay on
the plains of Champagne, the Governor of the Invalides, old Marshal
Serrurier, a distinguished veteran of the Revolutionary Army, had
applied to the Minister of War for instructions as to the disposal of
the trophies at the Invalides in the event of the enemy advancing on
Paris. The only answer he received was a formal letter to the effect
that the matter would have to go before the Emperor. At that time
Napoleon was in the midst of his last forlorn-hope attempt to stem the
tide of invasion; in the midst of a life-and-death struggle, fighting
desperately day after day at one place or another. The Ministry of War
apparently pigeon-holed the application after that, and forgot all
about the trophies at the Invalides until the actual day of the attack
on Paris--until that Wednesday forenoon.

[Sidenote: FORGOTTEN UNTIL TOO LATE]

Then, when already Marmont’s outer line of defence had been forced,
and the last fight for the inner heights overlooking the city was
raging furiously, almost within sight from the Invalides, a letter
from the War Minister was handed to Serrurier. It “trusted that the
Marshal had taken steps for the safety of the trophies; especially
for the preservation of Frederick the Great’s sword. The flags,”
continued the letter, “had best be detached from their staves, and
rolled up carefully. The War Minister is sure that your Excellency
will do all that is possible. The road to the Loire is open.” Such
were the instructions sent to the Invalides after the eleventh hour!
Then, during the afternoon, when the enemy’s bombshells, fired from the
plateau of Chaumont, were falling in the heart of the city, a single
artillery wagon, or fourgon, a vehicle barely large enough to remove
a small percentage of what there was to carry away, drew up at the
main gates of the Invalides. It brought also ten more trophy flags,
collected from somewhere in Paris. In the general confusion nobody,
it would seem, even inquired what they were or where they came from.
The driver’s instructions were merely that “they were to go away with
the Invalides trophies.” The ten flags were taken out and stacked in a
corridor for the time being, while the fourgon waited unheeded at the
gate until after dark.

What steps Marshal Serrurier took during the afternoon to secure
adequate transport is unknown; or, indeed, what he did with himself
all that time. The Governor was seen just before the dinner-hour in
the Corridor d’Avignon, in an out-of-the-way part of the building, in
conference with the Lieutenant-Governor and an adjutant-major. Another
officer, Adjutant Vollerand, was with them, holding in his hands
Frederick the Great’s sword and sash. Apparently they did not want to
be observed, and were discussing how to hide the relics or bury them
within the precincts of the Invalides. After that nothing more was seen
of Serrurier at the Invalides until between nine and ten at night, some
hours after the Capitulation, and when it had become known that the
Allies intended to occupy Paris in force, and that their troops would
enter and take possession of the city early next morning. Then the
Governor reappeared.

A few minutes after nine o’clock the veterans of the Invalides, who
had been restlessly pacing about the halls and corridors during the
evening, or standing about in dejected groups in the courtyards, not
knowing what they were to do, were suddenly summoned to muster at once
in the Grand Court, or Cour d’Honneur. All turned out from the wards
and paraded, forming up by the light of lanterns. All but those who
were bedridden were brought out, the maimed and cripples being led out,
or hobbling out on their crutches, together with the survivors of those
who had fought so gallantly at the barriers during the day, their faces
still begrimed with powder-smoke, their clothes torn and stained,
some without their hats, their arms in slings, or with bandages over
recent wounds. Then the tall, spare figure of the Governor, a grim,
hard-featured old warrior, white-haired, over seventy years of age, was
seen emerging from his quarters, with the senior staff-officers of the
Hospital following in rear. Serrurier harangued the pensioners briefly.
He told them that the enemy would enter the city next day and would
present themselves at the Invalides to enforce the giving up of the
trophies. What did the men of the Invalides desire should be done?

[Sidenote: “LET US BURN THEM HERE!”]

There was a pause for a moment; a dead silence, as the old
soldiers gazed dumbfoundedly at one another. Then one man stepped
out to the front and spoke up for the rest. A battle-scarred old
sergeant-pensioner of the Grenadiers of the Old Guard answered the
Governor on behalf of his comrades, his reply, greeted as it was by
vociferous shouts of approval on every side, voicing the unanimous wish
of the veterans. “If they will not let us keep our banners, let us burn
them here! We will swallow the ashes!” The order to make a bonfire of
the trophies then and there was issued forthwith.

Anything that came to hand for fuel was eagerly seized, and a great
pile speedily made of broken-up stools and mess-tables and forms,
hauled out from the barrack-rooms withindoors. They were stacked in
a heap just in front of the pedestal on which it had been intended to
erect an equestrian statue of the heroic Marshal Lannes, who died from
his wounds at Aspern in the arms of Napoleon. Meanwhile, parties of
men ran inside with ladders, and set to work to strip the dining-halls
and the Chapel of the rows of flags hanging up there. They bore them
outside, roughly bundled together in their arms; some, silently, with
frowning, stern-set faces and set teeth; others beside themselves with
rage, and cursing savagely aloud; others sullenly muttering oaths; not
a few of the old fellows with tears streaming down their cheeks. They
carried the trophies out and heaped them up into an immense funeral
pyre. The battalion and other Eagles shared the fate of the captured
trophies--standards, some of these, that had been borne under fire in
the thick of triumphant battle at Austerlitz, and Jena, at Auerstadt
and Friedland--to save them on the morrow from falling into the hands
of those in whose defeat and humiliation they had had their part. The
fire was lighted and the masses of tattered silk blazed up furiously.
When the flames were at their fiercest, Marshal Serrurier stepped
forward and with his own hand flung into the midst of the fiery mass
the sword of Frederick the Great.

For half the night the veterans stood round and watched the flames
complete the work of destruction. They stood massed round in a densely
packed throng of sullen, gloomy, brokenhearted men. They stayed there
until long after midnight, gazing, in a state of dull despair, at the
fire; while some now and again stirred up the glowing fuel and made
the flames leap up afresh, roaring and crackling and casting a dull
red throbbing glare over the old walls and rows of windows all round,
and gleaming on the lofty gilded dome of the Invalides, in itself an
intended memento of victory. On first seeing the golden domes of the
Kremlin as he approached Moscow, Napoleon had sent orders to Paris to
have the dome of the Invalides gilded as a memorial of his achievement
of the goal of the campaign! Most of the veterans stood there
throughout the greater part of that cold March night, watching until
the fire had died down and only a great heap of smouldering cinders
remained; all that was left of the trophies of victorious France.

[Sidenote: THE TROPHIES OF TWO CENTURIES]

Among the vast array of foreign trophies at the Invalides that perished
on that night were English flags nearly two centuries old, the remains
of the spoil of some forty-four English banners of Charles the First’s
soldiers, triumphantly carried to Paris from the Ile de Rhé in November
1627 and hung in Notre Dame. Others flags destroyed there, too, dated
from the wars of the Grand Monarque; spoils won on the battlefield by
the famous Condé and Turenne; also trophies taken from William the
Third at Steenkirk and Landen and elsewhere; the British and Dutch
and Danish and Bavarian ensigns won by Turenne’s great successor,
Marshal Luxembourg, “le Tapissier de Notre Dame,” as they dubbed him
at Versailles, for the almost innumerable trophies sent by Luxembourg
to be hung up in the Cathedral of Paris, with State processions and Te
Deums in the presence of the King. Other British battle-spoils, the
trophies of France, which passed out of existence at the Invalides on
that night were these: a flag taken at Fontenoy by the Irish Brigade;
the regimental colours surrendered by the garrison of Minorca which
Admiral Byng failed to rescue; those of another British garrison of
Minorca of the time of the Great Siege of Gibraltar, when France, for
the second time, wrested the island from England; four British and
Hessian regimental flags surrendered to Washington at Yorktown and sent
by Congress as a gift to the King of France; flags taken by the French
from British West India garrisons in the same war; besides British
naval ensigns also taken during the American War, with other British
ship-flags, some of which indeed dated from the earlier battle times
of Duguay Trouin and Jean Bart. Destroyed at the Invalides also on
that Wednesday night was a British naval ensign from Trafalgar. It had
been hoisted on board one of Nelson’s prizes, the _Algéciras_. In the
storm after the battle the ship was in imminent peril of wreck, and the
French prisoners on board were liberated in order to help to save her.
They used their freedom to overpower the small British prize-crew and
carried the vessel off into Cadiz, whence the British ensign, hoisted
originally in triumph over the French tricolor during the battle of two
days before, on the _Algéciras_ being captured, was sent as a trophy to
Paris. There were also destroyed at the Invalides at the same time the
ensign of Lord Cochrane’s famous brig-of-war, the _Speedy_, captured in
the Mediterranean in 1801, and those of three British line-of-battle
ships, the _Berwick_, the _Swiftsure_, and the _Hannibal_, taken within
the previous twenty years.

[Sidenote: SPOILS TAKEN IN NAVAL FIGHTS]

Most of the trophies won by Napoleon and the Grand Army all over
Europe, and by the Armies of the Republic and Consulate before
that, perished in the holocaust: the spoils of Valmy and Fleurus
and Jemmapes; of Hohenlinden; of Dego and Mondovi; of Rivoli and
Montenotte; of Castiglione, Lodi, and Arcola; of Zurich and Marengo,
and other victories. On that night, too, passed out of existence the
famous flag of the Army of Italy presented by Napoleon, and bearing
inscribed on it the names of eighty triumphs on the battlefield and the
detailed record of the taking of 150,000 prisoners, 170 standards, 550
siege-guns, and 600 pieces of field artillery; the Horse-tail banners
of the Mamelukes, taken by Napoleon at the battle of the Pyramids; the
historic standard of the Knights of St. John, won in hand-to-hand fight
outside the main gate of Valetta. Most of the 340 Prussian standards
Napoleon sent to Paris after the Jena campaign, together with the sword
and Black Eagle sash of Frederick the Great, as well as the recovered
French trophies of the Seven Years’ War, originally won by Frederick at
Rosbach, the standards of Frederick the Great’s Guards, and Austrian
spoils taken by the Prussians at Leuthen, Kolin, and Hohenfriedburg,
all of which had been carried off to Paris by Napoleon--these were
among the war-treasures destroyed at the Invalides on that night. With
them went into the flames the Grand Army’s Russian trophies from Eylau
and Friedland, the Austrian trophies from Eckmühl and Wagram, besides
many Spanish and Portuguese trophies taken before Wellington landed in
the Peninsula to turn the tide of war.

[Sidenote: AFTER DUPONT’S SURRENDER]

One French Eagle which perished on that night was the survivor of a
disaster: Dupont’s surrender at Bailen in Andalusia in 1808,[36] at
the outset of the Spanish insurrection; that cruel humiliation for
the arms of France, the news of which came on Europe with all the
startling effect of a thunderclap, and drove Napoleon nearly frantic
in his furious indignation. It had been one of three Eagles taken by
the Spaniards, that of the 24me Légère, and had been recovered by the
daring of an officer of the regiment, one of the prisoners, Captain
Lanusse. Confined in a prison-hulk at Cadiz, he escaped to shore
one night, managed to find out where his regiment’s flag was kept,
displayed as a Spanish trophy, got hold of it, and then made his way
outside the city into the lines of the besieging French army. There
he presented the Eagle to Marshal Soult, who forwarded it direct to
Napoleon. Lanusse, as his reward, was promoted a _chef de bataillon_ of
the 8th of the Line, and fell to the bayonet of a British soldier of
the 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers at Barrosa. The recovered Eagle Napoleon
sent to the Invalides.

By morning all that remained of the proud trophies of France at the
Invalides was a heap of grey ashes, fragments of charred flag-poles,
and scraps of partly molten metal. The _débris_ was raked up at
daylight, and shovelled into the artillery fourgon of the previous
afternoon, which had been standing all night outside the main gate
of the Invalides. The artillery wagon drove off with it to the Seine
near by and emptied the heap into the river. That was the end of the
night’s destruction.

[Sidenote: ALL THAT WAS DREDGED UP]

Some portion of the _débris_ was recovered from the Seine a year
afterwards, and is preserved in the Chapel of the Invalides now. In
June 1815 a workman, doing some repairs by the riverside, discovered a
portion of a flag under water, and on hearing of that, two patriotic
young Frenchmen, an engineer and a journalist, privately set to work
soon afterwards to see if they could fish up anything that might
be worth preserving. At the time the Allies were in possession of
Paris, during the second occupation, after Waterloo, and the two
young men had to proceed cautiously. They were successful in the end
in recovering portions of 183 trophies, metal spear-head ornaments,
from ensign-staves mostly. Seventy-eight were later identified as of
Austrian origin; one as part of a British flag; two as having belonged
to Russian standards; various fragments as the remains of thirty-nine
Prussian standards; four from Spanish flags with Bourbon fleurs-de-lis;
and two fragments of Turkish standards from Egypt. The remainder of the
salvage it was impossible to identify.

That the great sacrifice had not been made in vain, was speedily
apparent. In the course of the morning after the bonfire, a little
before noon on Thursday, March 31, within two hours of the entry into
Paris of the vanguard of the Allied armies, a Russian aide de camp
presented himself at the Invalides, and, in the name of the Allied
sovereigns, demanded a statement of the trophies kept there. The
officer came up on horseback, accompanied by a mounted man of the
National Guard, and an armed escort of Russian dragoons. The main
gate was open as usual, and the Russian officer rode through without
taking notice of the gate-sentry’s challenge. He was only stopped
by a rush of the pensioners’ day-guard, called out by the sentry’s
shout of alarm--“Aux armes!” The guard turned out and faced the aide
de camp with lowered halberds. The Russian colonel protested, but
the officer on duty refused to let him pass without orders from his
own chief, and General Darnaud, the Lieutenant-Governor, was sent
for. That officer came, and the Russian dismounted and explained his
mission. He had orders, he said, to “take cognisance” of the trophies
of the Invalides. General Darnaud replied bluntly: “Very good, I will
permit you to visit the Hôtel. Come with me!” The general added: “As
to the trophies, sir, we have dealt with them according to the laws of
war!” “On en avait agi suivant les lois de guerre!” were his words.
The Russian did not seem to grasp the general’s meaning, and stood
still for a moment, staring blankly at him. On that, Madame Darnaud,
the Lieutenant-Governor’s wife, who had followed into the courtyard
immediately after her husband, interposed. She addressed the officer,
speaking volubly and angrily, but only to draw down on herself from the
Russian the uncivil rejoinder that he had not come there to talk to a
woman! After that, the general, accompanied by some of the men of the
main guard with shouldered halberds, formally conducted the officer
inside the Invalides, the party taking their way along the colonnade
round the Court of Honour, in the midst of which could be seen the wide
burnt-out space where the fire had been, the pungent smell of the fumes
from which still hung about the place, and so into the Chapel of St.
Louis. There the scene that met the Russian aide de camp’s eyes seemed
to stagger him: bare blank walls, the gallery stripped and defaced;
with empty and broken metal sockets here and there to show where the
flags had been fastened up. The interior had been entirely cleared from
end to end along the sides. It was absolutely unrecognisable to any who
had seen it before. The Russian officer, who had visited the Invalides
six or seven years previously, after Tilsit, could only gaze round
dumbly, utterly taken aback. He muttered something, but did not speak
aloud. Then, glaring round savagely into the eyes of those about him,
he turned away abruptly, and was conducted to the Outer Court, where he
remounted his horse, and rode off hastily in the direction whence he
had come.

[Sidenote: THE WALLS STRIPPED AND BARE]

All Napoleon’s trophies, however, did not perish at the Invalides.
Some of the Grand Army’s captured flags, as it so chanced, escaped
destruction on that night, and are at the Invalides now. They are
in the Chapel and in the Salle Turenne, besides half a hundred in
the Crypt, grouped round Napoleon’s tomb. The forty-five Austrian
flags taken at Ulm are beside Napoleon’s tomb, with nine other flags.
Presented by the Emperor to the Senate, as has been told, the Ulm
trophies, during the night of March 30, were hastily taken down from
where they had been hung in the Grand Salon for the past nine years,
and hidden in a vault below. They made a second public appearance on
the occasion of Napoleon’s funeral at the Invalides in 1840, when they
were placed at the head of the coffin. They have ever since been kept
beside the tomb.

The Austerlitz trophies met another fate. Kept at Notre Dame, they
disappeared mysteriously from there in the early morning of the day of
the entry of the Allies into Paris. At three in the morning of March
31 an urgent message from the Prefect of the Seine was delivered at
Notre Dame, calling on the Cathedral authorities to take down and
conceal the Austerlitz trophies at once. The Chapter met hastily in the
Archbishop’s room, and the flags were all down within half an hour.
They have never been seen since, nor was their fate ever accounted for.

[Sidenote: HOW FIFTY-ONE FLAGS WERE SAVED]

At the Luxembourg Palace were displayed 110 trophies, the spoils
of the Eagles, won from all the nations of Europe and presented to
the _Corps Legislatif_ by Napoleon. They were safely removed on the
night of March 30, and were hidden securely. Brought out and set up
again a year later, on Napoleon’s return from Elba, the authorities
forgot about hiding them again in the confusion after Waterloo. As the
result more than half of them are now in Berlin. Blücher sent a party
of staff officers to seize the entire collection, but a sharp-witted
functionary hoodwinked the Prussians on their arrival. They went back
to get written orders, and before they returned, as many as possible
of the trophies had been pulled down and got out of the way. One of
the attendants managed the affair on his own initiative, a hall-porter
named Mathieu. He was able to save and hide as many as fifty-one of the
flags, and they have since been forwarded to the Invalides. The other
fifty-nine trophies the Prussians seized and carried off. Two Austrian
standards taken by Napoleon at Marengo escaped destruction by having
been previously lent from the Invalides to an artist, Charles Vernet,
for a battle-picture he had been commissioned to paint for Napoleon.
They were in Vernet’s studio in March 1814. His son, Horace Vernet,
returned them in later days to the Invalides, where they now are.

In addition, it would seem, at least a moiety of the Invalides trophies
were kept back at the last moment by some of the veterans themselves.
Several of the old soldiers, it would appear, after stripping down the
flags from the walls, instead of carrying all out into the courtyard to
the bonfire, retained and hid a few of them on their own account, to
smuggle them outside afterwards and keep them in concealment.[37]




CHAPTER XII

THE EAGLES OF THE LAST ARMY


The Eagles came back to France with the return of Napoleon from Elba;
to lead the last Army to the campaign of the Hundred Days.

They “flew from steeple to steeple across France,” in Napoleon’s
expressive phrase, “from the shores of Fréjus until they alighted
on the towers of Notre Dame.” The enthusiasm that greeted their
reappearance spread like wild-fire; it blazed up like an exploding
magazine. The rapturous acclamation and enthusiasm with which the
Eagles were welcomed back was the measure of the prevailing discontent
and resentment among the soldiers at the harsh and unworthy treatment
they had received during the ten months of the restored _régime_.

The Army had come off badly by its change of masters. The Bourbons had
done all in their power to alienate its regard; as much through malice
in not a few cases, as through downright stupidity.

“Of all the institutions of France the most thoroughly national and
the most thoroughly democratic was the Army; it was accordingly
against the Army that the _noblesse_ directed its first efforts.
Financial difficulties made a large reduction in the forces necessary.
Fourteen thousand officers and sergeants were accordingly dismissed
on half-pay; but no sooner had this measure of economy been effected
than a multitude of emigrants who had served against the Republic in
the army of the Prince of Condé or in La Vendée were rewarded with all
degrees of military rank.... The tricolor, under which every battle of
France had been fought from Jemmapes to Montmartre, was superseded by
the white flag of the House of Bourbon, under which no living soldier
had marched to victory.... The Imperial Guard was removed from service
at the Palace, and the so-called Military Household of the old Bourbon
monarchy revived, with the privileges and the insignia belonging to the
period before 1775.”

The abolition of the Eagles was the preliminary step of all. A
justifiable measure, no doubt, from a political point of view, it
touched to the quick the military instinct of the nation. And on that
followed the abolition of the national tricolor in favour of the old
Bourbon white flag.

[Sidenote: EVERY ONE TO BE DESTROYED]

Within three weeks of the Farewell of Fontainebleau the Eagles of the
Army, with the tricolor standards, were officially proscribed; the
order went forth to send them to Paris forthwith for destruction in
the furnaces of the artillery dépôt at Vincennes. On May 12 it was
notified that the white Bourbon flag was again to be the standard of
the Army, with a brass fleur-de-lis at the head of the colour-staff in
place of the Eagle.

Every regiment was required to send its Eagle to the Ministry of War
in Paris on receipt of the order. No allowances or exceptions were
made; although in several instances officers urgently petitioned to be
allowed to retain their Eagles with the corps, if only as mementoes
of feats of arms achieved by the regiments in battle. Every request
was rejected, whatever the circumstances. There were reasons of State
policy no doubt, as has been said, against the general retention as
regimental standards of military insignia so intimately associated
with Napoleon; but in certain instances, at least, indulgence might
reasonably have been extended to the applications. There were personal
and romantic associations connected with some of the Eagles, specially
endearing them to the soldiers, for which privilege might well have
been accorded. One very hard case may be cited as typical of others:
that of the Eagle of the 25th of the Line.

The Eagle of the 25th had been carried under fire in some twenty
battles and all through the Moscow campaign; and had notable
battle-scars to show for its distinguished services. One leg and one
wing of the Eagle had been shot away in action, and there were five
bullet-holes in its metal body. Its maimed appearance, indeed, had
attracted Napoleon’s attention at a review, and he had stopped while
riding past the regiment and taken the Eagle into his hands, examining
it with extreme interest and putting his fingers into the bullet-holes,
finally returning it to the Porte-Aigle with a deep bow of respect. The
regiment almost worshipped their Eagle on its own account, for what
it had gone through; but it had further undergone yet more surprising
adventures. The 25th had been in the garrison of Dresden in 1813 when
Marshal St. Cyr had to capitulate to the Austrians. On the night
before the surrender the Eagle-staff was broken up and burned, and the
few strips of ragged silk that remained of the shot-torn regimental
tricolor flag were tied under an officer’s uniform for secret
conveyance out of the city. The shattered Eagle broke in two while
being removed from its staff, and its two fragments were concealed
under the petticoats of two vivandières who were to convey it in that
manner to the regimental dépôt in France. Under the capitulation the
garrison was granted the honours of war and a safe-conduct back to
France. The terms, however, were annulled by the Allied Sovereigns then
advancing, after Leipsic, to invade France, and in the outcome all the
regiments, after they had started for France, were made prisoners and
marched away to be interned in Hungary. The major of the 25th got back
the two fragments of the Eagle, stowed them away under his uniform, and
kept them about him by day and night for five months; until finally,
on his release after Napoleon’s abdication, he brought the Eagle back
across the Rhine, “wrapped up like contraband.”

[Sidenote: “SEND IT TO PARIS FORTHWITH!”]

On the 25th receiving the order to send in its Eagle for destruction,
he wrote personally to the Minister of War--General Dupont, of Bailen
notoriety, as has been said--who had never forgiven Napoleon’s harsh
usage of him, and now took every opportunity of paying back old
scores on the heads of his former comrades in arms. The major wrote
setting forth in detail the story of the regimental Eagle, relating
its exceptionally interesting career and its battle damages, also how
he had preserved it after Dresden, and implored the War Minister, in
the name of the regiment, that they might retain the two fragments to
be kept in the regimental “Salle d’Honneur” as an honoured relic. The
reply was a peremptorily worded command to send the Eagle to Paris
forthwith for destruction with the other Eagles of the Army. The
major, in the circumstances, considered himself compelled to comply.
He summoned the officers to his quarters, where they “paid their last
adieux to the object of veneration, and then, in their presence, the
Eagle fragments were packed in a box, and despatched to the Ministry of
War.”

The story, with others to the same effect, went the round of every
barrack-room in France, and wherever it was told, there were angry
murmurings and increased discontent.

By no means all the Eagles of the Army, it would appear, were given
up to the authorities in Paris. Not a few colonels flatly refused
to comply with Dupont’s order, taking the risk of prosecution or of
being turned out of the service summarily--a certainty in any event
under the new _régime_, as the majority of the senior regimental
officers anticipated, and as actually came to pass. General Petit of
the Grenadiers of the Old Guard, as has already been said, refused to
give up that famous Eagle, and concealed it successfully; and not a
few other officers did the same with the Eagles of their corps. Others
destroyed their regimental Eagles and either burned the silken tricolor
flags, or cut them up; dividing the ashes or fragments among their
comrades.

Their Eagles taken away, it was next made known to the Army, that the
“battle honours” and war distinctions of the various corps, won under
Napoleon, would not appear on the new regimental flags when issued.
“Austerlitz,” “Jena,” “Friedland,” and the other names of pride to the
Grand Army, were henceforward to be erased from military recognition.
The new flags, when publicly distributed in September 1814, showed
each a blank white field, with on it only an oval shield, bearing the
three fleurs-de-lis, the Royal Bourbon cognisance, and the name of the
corps--its new name, revived from Army Lists of the Old Monarchy, a
name long since forgotten and totally unfamiliar.

[Sidenote: NO MORE REGIMENTAL NUMBERS]

The regimental numbers of the Grand Army, ennobled by glorious
campaigns, immortalised by their associations of victory and
brilliant feats of arms, instinct with a renown acquired on a hundred
battlefields all over Europe, were at the same time done away with by
a stroke of the War Minister’s pen. That proved the most unpopular
measure of all; the cruellest of blows to the _esprit de corps_ and
pride of the former soldiers of Napoleon. It was felt as a gratuitous
insult; it was perhaps the most deeply resented injury of all. In
future, in place of their treasured regimental numbers, the various
corps of the Army, horse and foot, were to be known by departmental or
territorial names--meaningless to nine soldiers out of ten, and without
traditions--or else by the names of royal princes and princesses, and
titled personages, remembered only, some of them, as having fled on
the battlefield before the national armies. Bercheney and Chamborant
Hussars, Orléans Dragoons and Chasseurs, Regiments d’Artois, de Berri,
d’Armagnac, d’Angoulême, de Monsieur, d’Anjou, and so forth--what
traditions had designations such as these to compare with, to mention
in the same breath with, the traditions immortally associated with
the numbers, familiar as household words wherever French soldiers met
together, of the dragoon and chasseur regiments which Murat had led
at Austerlitz, of the dashing hussars of Lassalle, of the cuirassiers
whose resistless onset had swept the field at Jena, of the horsemen
at the sight of whose sabres before their gates Prussian fortresses
had surrendered at discretion? It came with a sense of personal
degradation, as a sort of desecration on the men of regiments like the
75th of the Line, or the 32nd, the 9th Light Infantry or the 84th, or
the 35th, or “Le terrible 57me”--to be labelled and hear themselves
officially addressed on parade as “Beauvoisis” or “Auxerre” or
“Nivernais,” by the name of some prosaic locality, or the style of some
ancient aristocrat, their titular colonel.[38]

[Sidenote: AT THE HEAD OF THE “ELBA GUARD”]

Napoleon announced the return of the Eagle in his first address to
the Army, sent off on his landing to be distributed broadcast among
the soldiers. “Come and range yourselves under the banners of your
chief.... Victory shall march at the _pas de charge_: the Eagle with
the national colours shall fly from steeple to steeple to the towers of
Notre Dame!”

The first of the regimental Eagles to make its appearance in France
accompanied Napoleon from Elba and landed with him. It was the Eagle
of the six hundred veterans of the Old Guard who, as the “Elba Guard,”
had volunteered to share Napoleon’s exile, and had formed his personal
escort. It figured in the historic scene at Grenoble a week after
the landing, where Napoleon, on meeting the first soldiers sent to
arrest his advance, by the magic of his presence and the sight of
the Eagle borne behind him, so dramatically won over to his side the
former 5th of the Line, the first regiment of the Army to throw in
its lot with Napoleon after Elba. The Eagle that had its part on the
historic occasion--with its silken tricolor flag, embroidered with
silver wreaths and scrollery, and golden bees, crowns and Imperial
cyphers, and inscribed “L’Empereur Napoléon à la Garde Nationale de
l’Ile Elba”--is now in private possession in England. It fell by some
means into the hands of a Prussian soldier at the occupation of Paris
after Waterloo and was sold a few weeks later to a visitor to Paris. In
the dramatic scene of the meeting of Napoleon with the 5th of the Line,
General Cambronne, Commander of the Elba Guard, bore the Eagle a few
paces behind Napoleon and held it up appealingly to the regiment.

[Sidenote: “LET ANY WHO WISHES--FIRE!”]

The 5th of the Line, says one story, vouched for by an eye-witness,
was marching out to block a narrow gorge through which ran the road
Napoleon was known to be taking. At some little way off, his party was
seen approaching, he himself being readily recognised by his small
cocked hat and _redingote gris_. Immediately the men were formed up
across the road, and, as Napoleon came nearer, they were ordered to
make ready and present. They did so: the muskets came up and were
levelled. Then came a pause; dead silence; an interval of breathless
suspense. Napoleon’s own action decided the issue. Stepping rapidly
forward, opening and throwing back his great-coat as he did so, he
called aloud to the regiment: “Soldats, voilà votre Empereur! Que celui
d’entre vous qui voudra le tuer, faire feu sur lui!” (“Soldiers, here
is your Emperor! Let any one who wishes to kill him fire on him!”) A
Royalist officer hastily called out the order: “Le voilà! donnez feu,
soldats!” But not a shot came. The next instant, with shouts of “Vive
l’Empereur!” the soldiers lowered their muskets, broke their ranks,
and rushed forward to surround Napoleon and welcome him in a frenzy of
enthusiasm.

According to another story, this is what took place. Before the word
“Fire!” could be given, Napoleon had stepped forward, close up to the
muzzles of the levelled muskets. With a smile on his face he began in
his usual colloquial, familiar way when talking to the men: “Well,
soldiers of the 5th, how are you all? I am come to see you again: is
there any one of you who wishes to kill me?” Shouts came in reply of
“No, no, Sire! certainly not!” The muskets went down; Napoleon passed
along the ranks, inspecting the men just as of old; after that the
regiment faced about, took the lead of the party, and, with Napoleon in
the middle and the “Elba Guard” bringing up the rear, all marched on
towards Grenoble.

[Sidenote: MARSHAL NEY’S DILEMMA]

There, meanwhile, events had been moving rapidly. The commandant of
the garrison was an _émigré_ officer, but most of the troops had been
won over for Napoleon by Colonel Labédoyère, at the head of the 7th
of the Line. The commandant ordered the gates to be closed, which was
done; also the cannon on the ramparts to be loaded. That order was duly
obeyed; “but the men rammed home the cannon-balls first, before putting
in the powder, so that the guns were useless.” Labédoyère marched out
with his regiment to meet Napoleon, the band playing, “and carrying
the Eagle of the regiment, which had been concealed and preserved.”
They met Napoleon a short distance from Grenoble and, with the 5th, led
the way in, arriving after dark. “On Napoleon’s approach, the populace
thronged the ramparts with torches; the gates were burst open; Napoleon
was borne through the town in triumph by a wild and intermingled crowd
of soldiers and workpeople.”[39]

Napoleon entered Paris on the night of March 20. The Eagles made their
first appearance in the capital next day. They had been officially
restored as the standards of the Army by an Imperial decree issued on
March 13 from Lyons.

[Sidenote: AT THE FIRST REVIEW IN PARIS]

Paris saw them again first at the review of the garrison of the capital
which Napoleon held within twenty-four hours of his arrival; on the
Place du Carrousel, in front of the Tuileries. There too the Imperial
Guard, reconstituted that same morning, made their public reappearance.
In the midst of the brilliant scene, as Napoleon was ending the address
of personal thanks for their loyalty that he made to the assembled
troops in dramatic style, suddenly General Cambronne marched on to
the parade at the head of the Elba Six Hundred, with drums beating
and escorting the former Eagles of the Guard. Drawing up in line
ceremoniously, the “Elba Guard” halted before Napoleon, saluting and
dipping the Eagles forward. A frantic roar of enthusiastic cheering
greeted the salute of the Eagles.

Napoleon took instant advantage of the first pause as the cheering
subsided. Pointing to the veterans just arrived, and standing with
the Eagles ranged in front of them, held on high at arm’s-length by
their bearers, he again addressed the assembled troops. “They bring
back to you the Eagles which are to serve as your rallying-point.
In giving them to the Guard, I give them to the whole Army. Treason
and misfortune have cast over them a veil of mourning; but they now
reappear resplendent in their old glory. Swear to me, soldiers, that
these Eagles shall always be found where the welfare of the nation
calls them, and those who would invade our land again shall not be able
to endure their glance!” “We swear it! We swear it!” was the answer
that came back amid tumultuous shouts from every side.

[Sidenote: ONCE MORE THE FIELD OF MARS]

The Eagles restored by proclamation as the standards of the Army, and
the regiments reconstituted by their old numbers, to the unbounded
gratification of the soldiers everywhere, another Imperial proclamation
announced that Napoleon would once again personally distribute new
Eagles to the regiments. The ceremony of the Field of Mars of ten
years before would be repeated. The Emperor, with his own hand, would
present each Eagle to a regimental deputation, which would specially
attend in Paris to receive it. To give the utmost possible _éclat_ also
to the proceedings on the occasion, just as the former presentation
of the Eagles had been made an integral feature of the Coronation
celebration, so now the forthcoming distribution would take place at
the same time that Napoleon renewed his Imperial oath of fidelity to
the Constitution, as reshaped by the “_Acte Additionel_,” which had
been drafted to comply with the political exigencies of the moment.

The date provisionally fixed was towards the end of May. By that
time the returns of the _Plébiscite_ voting, to authorise the
re-establishment of the Empire, would be known. The historic event
takes its name of the “_Champ de Mai_” from the date proposed for it,
although, in actual fact, the ceremony took place on June 1. The place
appointed was where the former distribution of the Eagles had been
made, the Field of Mars, the wide open space in front of the Military
School, and the display was to be on no less grandiose scale than its
predecessor.

Immense wooden stands were erected all round the Field of Mars, with
tiers of benches, to seat, it was calculated, as many as two hundred
thousand people. In front of the Military School was set up an Imperial
throne, under a canopy of crimson silk, and elevated on a gorgeously
decorated platform. Napoleon was to take his new Imperial oath from
the throne, and thereupon formally attach his signature to the “_Acte
Additionel_.” There was to be a religious service also, and for that an
altar was erected at one side of the throne, raised on steps and draped
in red damask, picked out with gold. The balconies and stands all
round were draped and hung with tricolor flags, festooned amid gilded
Eagles, and heraldic insignia, and emblematic figures meant to typify
the prosperity and glory awaiting France under the returned Imperial
_régime_. As on the previous occasion, all the celebrities of France
were invited, and had their allotted places on the stands nearest the
throne. As before, too, the central arena was packed with a dense array
of troops; the deputations called up to receive the Eagles, the massed
battalions of the Imperial Guard, and detachments of all the regiments
of the garrison of Paris. It was a radiantly fine summer’s day, and the
display offered a spectacle of surpassing brilliance. Says one of the
officers: “The sun flashing on 50,000 bayonets seemed to make the vast
space sparkle!”

A hundred cannon fired from the Esplanade of the Invalides ushered in
the day of the “_Champ de Mai_.” Again, at ten o’clock, the artillery
thundered forth as Napoleon quitted the Tuileries in State to take
his way to the Field of Mars, “amid prodigious crowds of spectators
applauding enthusiastically,” along the Champs Elysées and across the
Pont d’Jéna.

[Sidenote: NINE MARSHALS TAKE PART]

Nine of the marshals who had cast in their lot with the returned
Emperor rode on either side of Napoleon’s coach: Davout, Minister of
War, who had not yet sworn allegiance to the Bourbons; Soult, the newly
appointed Chief of the Staff of the Army; Serrurier, Governor of the
Invalides; Brune and Jourdan; Moncey and Mortier; Suchet and Grouchy.
Ney was absent; Napoleon had refused to see him. Ney’s widely reported
speech to Louis XVIII., that he would “bring the bandit to Paris in
an iron cage,” had not been forgiven. Murat was in disgrace for his
recent blundering move in Northern Italy, which had vitally affected
Napoleon’s plans. His desertion during the closing campaign, when
Napoleon was at bay after Leipsic, moreover, was beyond condonation.
Of others who had been at Napoleon’s side on the Field of Mars ten
years before, Lefebvre and Masséna professed to be too old and infirm
for service in the field, although Masséna was still nominally on
the Active List, and had been in command for King Louis at Toulon.
He was due in Paris to meet Napoleon, but his fidelity was more than
doubtful: “gorged with wealth, Masséna thought only of preserving it.”
Augereau kept in the background, Napoleon refusing to have more to do
with him. Berthier, on that very morning, was lying dead at Bamberg
in Bavaria; whether victim of an accident or suicide has never been
made clear. Lannes and Bessières were in their graves, fallen on the
field of battle. Bernadotte, King of Sweden, was actively on the side
of the enemy. Marmont, Oudinot, Macdonald, and Victor, marshals of
later creation, had left France in company with the Bourbon princes.
Old Kellerman and Perignon, “Honorary Marshals” of 1804, had not come
forward again, remaining in seclusion; nor had St. Cyr, “the man of
ice,” another marshal since the Field of Mars, who was staying at home
with studied indifference, “occupying himself on his estate with his
hay crops and playing the fiddle.”

[Sidenote: THE “MAN OF SEDAN” WAS THERE]

Napoleon was accompanied in the State coach by three of his
brothers--Lucien, Joseph, and Jerome. This time there was of course
no Empress present. Josephine was dead: Marie Louise was holding
back elsewhere. None of the Bonaparte princesses appeared in the
procession. The only one attending the “_Champ de Mai_” came as a
spectator: Hortense Beauharnais, the daughter of Josephine and wife
of Louis Bonaparte. She had gone on in advance to the Military School
and was seated among the exalted personages awaiting Napoleon there;
accompanied by her two boys (one the future Third Napoleon, the “Man of
Sedan”). She seemed most interested, as we are told, in the sketch-book
she brought with her to draw a picture of the scene.

Napoleon alighted in the First Court of the Military School, being
acclaimed on all sides as he made his appearance with vociferous shouts
of “Vive l’Empereur!” Preceded by palace grandees and Court officials,
who had alighted from their carriages in advance and formed up to
receive him, he entered the building and passed on through to take his
seat on the throne. “He had the air of being in pain and anxious,”
describes an onlooker. “He descended slowly from his carriage while a
hundred drums beat ‘_Au Champ_.’ Then, advancing quickly, returning
the salutes of the assemblage at either side with bows, he proceeded
to the throne, and sat down, gazing round at the people in their dense
masses as he did so. Jerome and Joseph seated themselves on the right;
Lucien on the left; all three clad in white satin with black velvet
hats with white plumes. Napoleon himself had on his Imperial mantle of
ermine and purple velvet embroidered with golden bees.”

For a time the thundering cannon salutes and acclamations of the people
that hailed Napoleon’s appearance on the daïs were deafening. Bowing
repeatedly on every side, he took his seat on the throne, while all
present stood and remained uncovered. The guns then ceased, the music
of the bands and the drummings and trumpetings of the battalions died
away into silence. On that the ceremony of the day opened with the
celebration of High Mass by the Archbishop of Tours.

The religious portion of the pageant, we are told, “seemed to arouse no
interest in Napoleon. His opera-glass wandered all the time over the
immense multitude before him.” His attention was not recalled until
the Mass was over, when the delegates from the Electoral College,
marshalled by the Master of the Ceremonies, ascended the platform, and
ranged themselves before the throne. A Deputy stepped forward, and
after deep obeisance, in a loud resonant voice read an address teeming
with sentiments of patriotic attachment and expressing inviolable
fidelity towards the Emperor personally. Napoleon seemed to listen with
interest, “marking his approbation with nods and smiles.” The Deputy
ceased speaking amidst rapturous applause, and then Arch-Chancellor
Cambacérès, resplendent in a gorgeous orange-yellow robe, stood forward
in front of Napoleon to notify officially the popular acceptance of the
new national Constitution. He declared the total of the votes given in
the _Plébiscite_ to show a clear million in favour of the restoration
of the Empire. There was a flourish of trumpets, and forthwith the
chief herald proclaimed that the “Additional Act to the Constitution of
the Empire” had been agreed to by the French people.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON SIGNS THE ACT]

Again from all round thundered out an artillery salute, and the whole
assembly rose to their feet and cheered. A small gilded table was
brought forward and placed before Napoleon, who, the Arch-Chancellor
holding the parchment open, and Joseph Bonaparte presenting the pen,
publicly ratified the Act with his formal signature. The air resounded
once more with the cannon firing and noisy acclamations on all sides.

Napoleon rose, when at length the cheering ceased, to address the
assembly with one of his most impassioned dramatic harangues. “Emperor,
Consul, Soldier, I hold everything from the people! In prosperity and
in adversity; in the field, in the council; in power, in exile, France
has been the sole and constant object of my thoughts and actions!” So
he began. He closed in the same vein: “Frenchmen! my will is that of my
people; my rights are theirs; my honour, my glory, my happiness, can
never be separated from the honour, glory, and happiness of France!”

Again came the outburst of rapturous applause. It subsided, and the
Archbishop of Bourges, as Grand Almoner of the Empire, came forward.
Kneeling before Napoleon he presented the Book of the Gospels, on
which Napoleon solemnly took the Imperial Oath to observe the new
Constitution. There only remained for Arch-Chancellor Cambacérès and
the principal officers of State to take their oaths of allegiance to
the Constitution and the Emperor, and after that a solemn Te Deum
closed the political ceremony.

It was now the turn of the Eagles and the Army. The civilian personages
withdrew from the steps of the throne; the electoral deputations fell
back; leaving a clear open space in front. Immediately, as if by magic,
the Eagles suddenly appeared; long rows of them flashing and glittering
in the brilliant sunshine. They were brought forward in procession,
advancing in massed rows “resplendent and dazzling like gold.” Carnot,
Minister of the Interior, the “Organiser of Victory” of the Armies of
the Revolution, headed the procession, “clad in a Spanish white dress
of great magnificence,” carrying the First Eagle of the National Guard
of Paris. Next him came Marshal Davout, Minister of War, carrying
the Eagle of the 1st Regiment of the Line, and then Admiral Decrès,
Minister of Marine (as representing the French Navy), carrying the
Eagle of Napoleon’s 1st Regiment of Marines. General Count Friant (he
fell at Waterloo), as Colonel-in-Chief, bore the Eagle of the Imperial
Guard. Other officers of exalted rank bore other Eagles.

[Sidenote: SPRINGING FORWARD TO MEET THEM]

Napoleon’s demeanour, hitherto, for most of the time, formal and
apathetic, altered instantaneously at the appearance of the Eagles. “He
sprang from the throne, and, casting aside his purple mantle, rushed
forward to meet his Eagles”; amid a sudden hush that seemed to fall
over the whole assembly at the sight. Then the momentary silence was
broken. An enthusiastic shout went up as the Emperor, pressing forward
impetuously, as though electrified with sudden energy, took up his
station immediately in front of the array of soldiers, the _élite_ of
the veterans of the old Grand Army left alive, as they stood there
formed up in an immense phalanx. To the sound of martial music the
regimental deputations forthwith moved up and advanced to pass before
him. Napoleon, with a gesture of deep reverence, took each Eagle into
his own hands from the officer who had been carrying it, and then
delivered it with stately formality to its future regimental bearer as
the deputations in turn filed past him.

He had a word for the men of every corps as each set of ten officers
and men drew up before him. To some he said, glancing at the number of
their regiment on their shakos, “I remember you well. You are my old
companions of Italy!” or, “You are my comrades of Egypt!” and so on.
Others he reminded of past days of distinction. “You were with me at
Arcola!” he said to one group, or “at Rivoli!” “at Austerlitz!” “at
Friedland!” to others, as might be--his words, we are told, “inspiring
the men with deep emotion.” For each of the National Guard deputations
he had also their little speech. To one detachment for instance, as it
came up, he said: “You are my old companions from the Rhine; you have
been the foremost, the most courageous, the most unfortunate in our
disasters; but I remember all!”

The last Eagle presented, Napoleon called on the soldiers to take
the Army Oath of fidelity to the Standard, using his customary Eagle
oration formula.

“Soldiers of the National Guard of the Empire!” he began, “Soldiers of
my Imperial Guard! Soldiers of the Line on land and sea! I entrust to
your hands the Imperial Eagle! You swear here to defend it at the cost
of your life’s blood against the enemies of the nation. You swear that
it will always be your guiding sign, your rallying point!”

[Sidenote: AMIDST A TUMULT OF ENTHUSIASM]

Some of those nearest interrupted Napoleon with shouts of “We swear!”
He went on: “You swear never to acknowledge any other standard!” The
shouts of “We swear!” again broke in vociferously.

Napoleon again went on: “You, Soldiers of the National Guard of Paris,
swear never to permit the foreigner to desecrate again the capital of
the Great Nation! To your courage I commit it!” Cries of “We swear!”
repeated continuously amidst a tumult of clamour, once more burst forth.

Napoleon continued and concluded, turning to his favourite Pretorians:
“Soldiers of the Imperial Guard, swear to surpass yourselves in the
campaign which is now about to open, to die round your Eagles rather
than permit foreigners to dictate terms to your country!” He ceased
after that, and once again the air vibrated with shouts of “We swear!
We swear!” and ejaculations of “Vive l’Empereur!” from the soldiers and
the throng of onlookers cramming the stands around.[40]

The military _finale_ of the day was the march past of the assembled
troops before the Emperor, in slow time, headed by the Eagles. “Nothing
could have been more imposing,” says one of the spectators, “than
this concluding display in the magnificent pageant. Amid the crash
of military music, the blaze of martial decoration, the glitter of
innumerable arms, 50,000 men passed by. The immense concourse of
beholders, their prolonged shouts and cheers, the occasion, the Man,
the mighty events which hung in suspense, all concurred to excite
feelings and reflections which only such a scene could have produced.”
On the other hand, we have this from a colder critic of the scene: “The
display was without heart, and theatrical; the vows of the soldiers
were made without warmth. There was but little real enthusiasm: the
shouts were not those of future victors of another Austerlitz and
Wagram, and the Emperor knew it!” Which are we to believe?

According to Savary, who was close beside him, Napoleon, for his part,
was satisfied with the enthusiasm of the soldiers. “The Emperor left
the Field of Mars confident that he might rely on the sentiments then
manifested towards him, and from that moment his only care was to meet
the storm that was forming in Belgium.”

[Sidenote: ON THE REGIMENTAL PARADES]

The new Eagles left Paris that night with their escorts. Each, on its
arrival where its regiment was stationed, was received with elaborate
ceremony, and formally presented on parade to the assembled officers
and men; a religious service being held in addition in some cases, at
which all were sworn individually to give their lives in its defence.
This, for instance, is what took place with one regiment, the 22nd of
the Line, stationed with the advanced division of Grouchy’s Army Corps
on the Belgian frontier at Couvins, near Rocroy, in the Ardennes. “The
new Eagle,” describes one of the officers, “all fresh from the gilder’s
shop, was solemnly blessed in the church of Couvins; then each soldier,
touching it with his hand, swore individually to defend it to the
death. After the religious service the regiment formed in square, and
the colonel delivered an address, in which he recalled the old glories
of the 22nd of the Line, and expressed his conviction that the regiment
would worthily uphold the old-time fame of the corps in the coming
campaign. The glowing language was received with great emotion, and as
of happy augury for the future.”[41]




CHAPTER XIII

AT WATERLOO

“AVE CAESAR! MORITURI TE SALUTANT!”


The Eagles figure in four episodes in the story of Waterloo.

They had their part at the outset in that intensely dramatic display
on the morning of the battle, when, before the eyes of Wellington’s
soldiers, drawn up with muskets loaded and bayonets fixed, and guns
in position ready to open fire, Napoleon passed his army in review;
the last parade of the Last Army on the day of its last battle. Said
Napoleon himself afterwards, in words that are in keeping with the
resplendent spectacle: “The earth seemed proud to bear so many brave
men!” (“La terre paraissait orgueilleuse de porter tant de braves!”)

It was a little after nine in the morning that the Last Army of
Napoleon moved out from its bivouacs of the night before to take up
its station for the battle. This is how a British hussar, who was
looking on, describes the opening of the wonderful show: “Marching in
eleven columns they came up to the front and deployed with rapidity,
precision, and fine scenic effect. The drums beat, the bands played,
the trumpets sounded. The light troops in front pressed forward, and
the rattle of musketry was followed by the retreat of our horsemen and
foot soldiers. Light wreaths of smoke curled upwards into the misty
air, and through this thin veil the dense dark columns of the French
infantry and the gay and gleaming squadrons of French horse were seen
moving into their positions. Before them was the open valley, yet green
with the heavy crops; behind them dark fringes of wood, and a thick
curtain of dreary cloud.

“The French bands struck up so that we could distinctly hear them. Not
long after, the enemy’s skirmishers, backed by their supports, were
thrown out; extending as they advanced, they spread over the whole
space before them. Now and then they saluted our ears with well-known
music, the whistling of musket-balls. Their columns, preceded by
mounted officers to take up the alignments, soon began to appear; the
bayonets flashing over dark masses at different points, accompanied by
the rattling of drums and the clang of trumpets.

“They took post, their infantry in front, in two lines, 60 yards apart,
flanked by lancers with their fluttering flags. In rear of the centre
of the infantry wings were the cuirassiers, also in two lines. In
rear of the cuirassiers, on the right, the lancers and chasseurs of
the Imperial Guard, in their splendid but gaudy uniforms: the former
clad in scarlet; the latter, like hussars, in rifle-green, fur-trimmed
pelisse, gold lace, bearskin cap. In rear of the cuirassiers, on the
left, were the horse-grenadiers and dragoons of the Imperial Guard,
with their dazzling arms. Immediately in rear of the centre was the
reserve, composed of the 6th Corps, in columns; on the left, and on
the right of the Genappe road, were two divisions of light cavalry. In
rear of the whole was the infantry of the Imperial Guard in columns, a
dense dark mass, which, with the 6th Corps and cavalry, were flanked by
their numerous artillery. Nearly 72,000 men, and 246 guns, ranged with
matches lighted, gave an awful presage of the approaching conflict.”

[Sidenote: AS THEY MARCHED ON TO THE FIELD]

Napoleon rode out to watch them as they deployed into position. He took
his stand at the point where the columns reached the field and wheeled
off to right and left to form up in readiness for the signal that
should launch their massed ranks forward across the intervening valley
against the British position in front. Marshal Soult, Chief of the
General Staff, rode close behind Napoleon on one side; Marshal Ney, in
charge of the main attack that day, was on the other. In rear followed
in glittering array the cavalcade of staff officers, with, dragged
along after them, tied by a rope to a dragoon orderly, Napoleon’s
Waterloo guide, the innkeeper De Coster.

Hardly had Napoleon himself ever witnessed before the like of the
tremendous display of enthusiasm that greeted his presence on the
field on the morning of that final day. “The drums beat; the trumpets
sounded; the bands struck up ‘Veillons au salut de l’Empire.’ As they
passed Napoleon the standard-bearers drooped the Eagles; the cavalrymen
waved their sabres; the infantrymen held on high their shakos on their
bayonets. The roar of cheers dominated and drowned the beat of the
drums and the blare of the trumpets. The ‘_Vive l’Empereurs!_’ followed
with such vehemence and such rapidity that no commands could be heard.
And what rendered the scene all the more solemn, all the more moving,
was the fact that before us, a thousand paces away perhaps, we could
see distinctly the dull red line [“la ligne rouge sombre”] of the
English army.”

So one French officer (Captain Martin of the 45th of the Line)
describes. The shouts of “Vive l’Empereur!” says another, a veteran of
Count d’Erlon’s First Army Corps, “rose more vehemently, louder and
longer than I ever heard before, for our men were determined that they
should be heard among the brick-red lines which fringed the crest of
Mont Saint-Jean.”

It was for the Eagles the counterpart of the Day of the Field of Mars,
the culminating act of homage to Napoleon from the soldiers of the
Grand Army.

[Sidenote: HIS IN LIFE AND DEATH]

“The sight of him,” if we may use the words of Lamartine, “was for some
a recompense for their death, for others an incitement to victory! One
heart beat between these men and the Emperor. In such a moment they
shared the same soul and the same cause! When all is risked for one
man, it is in him his followers live and die. The army was Napoleon!
Never before was it so entirely Napoleon as now. He was repudiated by
Europe, and his army had adopted him with idolatry; it voluntarily
made itself the great martyr of his glory. At such a moment he must
have felt himself more than man, more than a sovereign. His subjects
only bowed to his power, Europe to his genius; but his army bent in
homage to the past, the present, and the future, and welcomed victory
or defeat, the throne or death with its chief. It was determined on
everything, even on the sacrifice of itself, to restore him his Empire,
or to render his last fall illustrious. Accomplices at Grenoble,
Pretorians at Paris, victims at Waterloo: such a sentiment in the
generals and officers of Napoleon had in it nothing that was not in
conformity with the habits and even the vices of humanity. His cause
was their cause, his crime their crime, his power their power, his
glory their glory. But the devotion of those 80,000 soldiers was more
virtuous, for it was more disinterested. Who would know their names?
Who would pay them for the shedding of their blood? The plain before
them would not even preserve their bones! To have inspired such a
devotion was the greatness of Napoleon; to evince it even to madness
was the greatness of his Army!”

[Sidenote: SOME WHO HAD MET BEFORE]

They knew, too, not a few of them, the stamp of men they were about
to meet. Never before that day, of course, had Napoleon met British
soldiers on the battlefield; but there were others present who had, and
a good many of them.

Many a French regiment at Waterloo had old scores of their own to
settle, past days to avenge. The 8th of the Line, the fate of whose
“Eagle with the Golden Wreath” at Barrosa has been recorded, were on
the field, and dipped their glittering new Eagle, received at the
“_Champ de Mai_,” in salute as they passed Napoleon that morning. So
too did the 82nd, whose former battalion Eagles from Martinique are
at Chelsea now; the 13th of the Line and the 51st, who lost their
regimental Eagles in the Retiro arsenal of Madrid; the 28th, who met
their fate, and lost their Eagle under the bullets of the British 28th
in the Pyrenees. Others were there who had fought against Wellington
in Spain, and, more fortunate, had preserved their Eagles. Among these
were the 47th, who on the battlefield at Barrosa lost and regained
their Eagle; and the 105th, mindful yet of their terrible Salamanca
experience of what dragoon swords in strong hands could do. The 105th
were destined, soldiers and Eagle alike, to undergo a fate more
fearful still, ere the sun should set that day.

Two of the regiments that paraded before Napoleon to meet the soldiers
of Wellington had met under fire the sailors of Nelson at Trafalgar:
the 2nd of the Line, now in Jerome Bonaparte’s division of Reille’s
Army Corps, and the 16th, serving with the Sixth Corps. A third
regiment, the 70th, which did duty as marines at Trafalgar, was with
Grouchy, not many miles away; as was the 22nd of the Line, whose
Eagle, taken at Salamanca, is at Chelsea Hospital, and the 34th, whose
drum-major’s staff is to this day a prized trophy of the British 34th
(now the First Battalion of the Border Regiment), won in Spain, when,
as it so befell, two regiments bearing the same number crossed bayonets
on the battlefield.[42]

The famous 84th of the Line were at Waterloo, with their proud legend,
“Un contre dix,” restored at the “_Champ de Mai_,” flaunting proudly
on their new silken flag as the Eagle bent in salute to Napoleon;
also, the hardly less widely renowned 46th, the corps of the First
Grenadier of France, La Tour d’Auvergne, whose name was called at the
head of the list at that morning’s roll-call and answered with the
customary answer, “Dead on the Field of Honour”; also, too, Napoleon’s
former-time favourite, the 75th, mindful still on that last day of
their glorious youth when “Le 75me arrive et bât l’ennemi”--a motto
that an earlier colonel of the corps had proposed once to replace on
the flag by “Veni, Vidi, Vici.”

The Old Guard paraded in their fighting kit, with, as usual, in their
knapsacks their full-dress uniforms, carried in readiness to be put on
for Napoleon’s triumphal entry into Brussels.

Drouet d’Erlon rode past at the head of the First Army Corps; Count of
the Empire in virtue of his rank as a general; once upon a time the
little son of the postmaster at Varennes, where Louis Seize and Marie
Antoinette so pitifully ended their attempted flight, harsh old Drouet,
ex-sergeant of Condé dragoons, from whom he inherited his talent for
soldiering. General Reille led past the Second Corps. He, curiously,
had had something of a naval past. He had hardly forgotten that other
battle-day morning, when he galloped on to the field of Austerlitz, and
reported himself to the Emperor as having come direct from Cadiz, put
ashore from the doomed French fleet of Admiral Villeneuve just a week
before it sailed to fight Trafalgar. Both Reille and his men, above
all others, were burning with excitement and eagerness that day to get
at the enemy. They had missed taking part either at Ligny or Quatre
Bras, through contradictory orders which had kept them marching and
counter-marching between the two battlefields; unable to reach either
in time. Smarting under the reproach that they had been useless in the
campaign, though the pick of the Line was in their ranks, the men one
and all were burning to retrieve their reputation.

Count Lobau--he took his name from the island in the Danube which
played so vital a part in the battle of Aspern--was at the head of the
Sixth Corps, the third of Napoleon’s grand divisions of the army at
Waterloo. Formerly General Mouton, Napoleon renamed him when he made
him a Count for his skill and heroism at Aspern. “Mon Mouton,” said
Napoleon of him once as he watched the general in action, “est un lion.”

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON IN HIGH SPIRITS]

Napoleon himself was in the highest spirits, full of pride and
confidence. In that mood had he announced his intention of holding the
review. There was no need to hurry, he said; Blücher and Wellington
had been driven apart. The parade would pass the time while waiting
for the soaked ground to get dry, and make it easier for the guns to
move from point to point. And there was also this. The spectacle would
have assuredly a disquieting effect on the Dutch and Belgians in
Wellington’s army. Many of the men in front of him had served with the
Eagles in former days: all stood nervously in awe, it was notorious, of
the mighty name and reputation of Napoleon. Hesitating, as some were
known to be, between their fears and their patriotism, the influence of
the imposing spectacle might well--believed Napoleon--turn the scale
and induce them to come over.

This was Napoleon’s plan for the battle, as outlined that morning to
his brother Jerome. First would be the general preparation for attack
by a tremendous cannonade all along the line from massed batteries.
On that, the two army corps of D’Erlon and Reille would advance
simultaneously and assault in front, supported by cavalry charges
of cuirassiers. Then, if the English had not yet been beaten, would
follow the final assault, the crushing blow that it would be impossible
to resist; to be delivered by the remaining army corps of Lobau and
the Young Guard, supported by the Middle Guard and the Old Guard. So
Napoleon planned to fight and win at Waterloo.

[Sidenote: “THE GAME IS WITH US”]

Of the ultimate issue of the day he flattered himself there could be
no two opinions. “At the last I have them, these English!” “(Enfin je
les tiens, ces Anglais!”) he exclaimed jubilantly as he reconnoitred
Wellington’s position in the early morning. At breakfast with the two
Marshals, Soult and Ney, he declared that the odds were 90 to 10 in his
favour. “Wellington,” he said to Ney, “has thrown the dice, and the
game is with us.”

He turned fiercely on Soult, who, knowing the mettle of the British
soldier from experience, had entreated him to recall Grouchy’s 30,000
men from watching the Prussians near Wavre.

“You think because Wellington has defeated you, that he must be a very
great general! I tell you he is a bad general, and the English are but
poor troops! This, for us, will only be an affair of a _déjeuner_--a
picnic!”

“I hope so,” was all that Soult said in reply.

At that moment Reille and General Foy, experienced Peninsular veterans
both, whose opinions should have had weight, were announced. Said
Reille, in reply to Napoleon’s asking what he thought: “If well placed,
as Wellington knows how to draw up his men, and if attacked in front,
the English infantry is invincible, by reason of its calm tenacity and
the superiority of its fire. Before coming to close quarters with the
bayonet we must expect to see half the assaulting troops out of action.”

Interposed Foy: “Wellington never shows his troops, but if he is
yonder, I must warn your Majesty that the English infantry in close
combat is the very devil!” (“L’infanterie Anglaise en duel c’est le
diable!”)

Napoleon lost his temper. With an exclamation of angry incredulity he
rose hastily from the breakfast table, and the party broke up.

He spent a great part of the day watching the battle from a little
mound, a short distance from the farm of Rossomme; mostly pacing to
and fro, his hands behind his back; at times violently taking snuff,
occasionally gesticulating excitedly. Near by was a kitchen table
from the farmhouse, covered with maps weighted down with stones, with
a chair placed on some straw, on which at intervals he rested. Soult
kept ever near at hand, and the staff remained a little in rear. It was
not until the afternoon was well advanced that Napoleon got again on
horseback.

As related by the guide De Coster in conversation with an English
questioner a few months after Waterloo, this is what passed:

“He had frequent communications with his aides de camp during the day?”

“Every moment.”

“And when they reported what was going on?”

“His orders were always ‘Avancez!’”

“Did he eat or drink during the day?”

“No!”

“Did he take snuff?”

“In abundance.”

“Did he talk much?”

“Never, except when he gave orders.”

“What was the general character of his countenance during the day?”

[Sidenote: WHEN THE LAST CHARGE FAILED]

“_Riante!_--till the last charge failed.”

“How did he look then?”

“_Blanc-mort!_”

“Did he say ‘_Sauve qui peut_’?”

“No! When he saw the English infantry rush forward, and the cavalry in
the intermediate spaces coming down the hill, he said: ‘_A present il
est fini. Sauvons-nous!_’”[43]


HOW WELLINGTON’S TROPHIES WERE WON

It was in Napoleon’s second grand attack that our two Waterloo
Eagle-trophies, the most famous spoils ever won by the British Army,
came into Wellington’s hands.

The first attack began about half-past eleven, when Reille’s corps, on
the French left, made its opening effort against Hougoumont. Intended
by Napoleon at the outset rather as a feint to mislead Wellington into
fixing his attention on that side, the stubborn defence of Hougoumont
involved the Second Corps in a struggle that kept it fully occupied for
the whole day; unable to take part or be of use elsewhere.

The second grand attack took place shortly after two in the afternoon,
when Marshal Ney made his tremendous onslaught with thirty-three
battalions of Drouet d’Erlon’s First Army Corps on the left-centre of
the British position, to the east of the Charleroi road, where Picton’s
men held the ground.

[Sidenote: A DARK OBJECT IN THE HAZE]

The launching of Ney’s attack just then came about as the result of
Napoleon’s sudden and disquieting discovery that the Prussians were
approaching. It was to have opened an hour earlier, but, because
of that, had been held back at the last moment. Napoleon, while
looking round with the idea that Grouchy’s troops might be in sight
in that quarter, made the discovery with his own eyes. Those round
him, indeed, at first doubted what the dark object--which appeared
in the hazy atmosphere like a shadow on the high ground near Mont
Saint-Lambert, some six miles off to the north-east--really was. Soult
at first could make out nothing; then he was positive it was a column
of troops--probably Grouchy’s. The staff, scanning the suspicious
neighbourhood with their telescopes, asserted that what the Emperor saw
was only a wood. The arrival of some hussars with a Prussian prisoner,
whom they had just captured while trying to get round with a despatch
from Bülow to Wellington to announce the approach of the Prussian
Fourth Corps, settled the question.

Napoleon paced backwards and forwards for a minute, taking pinches
of snuff incessantly. Then he ordered off his Light Cavalry to
reconnoitre; dictated to Soult an urgent message recalling Grouchy; and
sent off an aide de camp to tell Lobau to wheel the Sixth Corps to the
right, facing towards Saint-Lambert. After that he gave Ney orders to
open his attack.

Ney took in hand his work forthwith, and at once a terrific cannonade
opened. Eighty French field-guns, a third of Napoleon’s artillery on
the field, began firing together from the plateau in front of La Belle
Alliance; storming furiously with shot and shell to break down the
British resistance, and clear the way for the onset of the charging
columns. Without slackening an instant the guns thundered incessantly
for nearly an hour; getting back from the British artillery in reply a
fire that was at least as vigorous and no less effective.

[Sidenote: “EN AVANT!” “VIVE L’EMPEREUR!”]

Then Ney gave the word to advance.

Immediately the French infantry were on the move. They went forward
massed in four divisions; in four solid columns of from four to
five thousand men each, advancing _en échelon_ from the left, with
intervals between of about four hundred paces. Eight battalions made
up each column, except that of the second division, which had nine.
The battalions stood drawn up in lines, three deep, with a front of
two hundred files. They were packed closely, one behind the other;
with intervals between, from front to rear, of only five paces. So
closely were they wedged together, that there was barely room between
the battalions for the company officers. Two brigadiers, Quiot and
Bourgeois, led the left column, General Allix, their chief, being
elsewhere; General Donzelot, a keen soldier and universally popular as
the best hearted and most genial of good fellows, headed the second
column; Marcognet, a grim, hard-bitten veteran, a prime favourite with
Marshal Ney for his dogged determination in action, had the third;
General Durutte was in charge of the fourth, away to the right.

With their battalion-drums jauntily rattling out the _pas de charge_,
amid excited cries and loud exultant shouts of “En avant!” “Vive
l’Empereur!” the columns stepped off. Ahead of them raced forward at a
run swarming crowds of _tirailleurs_; extending fan-wise as they went,
spreading out widely across the front in skirmishing array. The four
massed columns surged quickly forward and over the edge of the plateau
down the slope on to the space of shallow valley between the armies.
As they did so, from the moment they crossed the crest-line and dipped
below, a fierce hurricane of fire beat in their faces. Round-shot and
shrapnel swept the columns through and through, tearing long bloody
lanes through the densely packed masses of men.

Marshal Ney accompanied the first column for some part of the way,
riding by the side of Drouet d’Erlon.

As they crossed the intervening ground below, the death-dealing
British guns fired down on them incessantly, but in spite of all, they
stoutheartedly moved forward, without checking their pace. It was
terribly toilsome work in places: now they had to plough laboriously
over sodden and slippery ground; now to trample their way through
cornfields with standing grain-crops nearly breast-high, or, where
trodden down, tangling round the men’s feet.

Quiot’s brigade turned off to attack La Haye Sainte, but the rest of
the division, Bourgeois’ men and the three other columns, held on their
way, moving in dense phalanxes of gleaming bayonets up the slopes.

The second column, Donzelot’s, reached the top a little in advance of
the others, and was met by Kempt’s brigade of Picton’s troops, which
charged it and forced it to yield ground.

A moment later Marcognet’s column reached the British line, coming up
over the crest of the hill immediately in front of Picton’s Highland
Brigade.

Received with a furious outburst of musketry from all along the
extended British line, Marcognet’s leading files were thrown into some
confusion by the hail of bullets. They were, however, veterans, and
though their ranks were shaken, they still pressed on, amid a tumult of
fierce cries and shouts of “Vive l’Empereur!” and the wild clash and
rattle of their drums.

But they got no farther. The British brigadier on the spot, Sir Dennis
Pack, called on the nearest Highland regiment, the 92nd, to charge them
with the bayonet. A moment after that, all unexpectedly, the cavalry of
the Union Brigade were on them.

[Sidenote: THE HIGHLANDERS DASH FORWARD]

The Highlanders dashed forward with exultant cheers and levelled
bayonets, taking the French volley that met them without firing back a
shot. They did not, however, get up to the French, nor actually cross
steel on steel. As the Highlanders got within a dozen yards the column
suddenly stopped short, and some of the men in front seemed suddenly
to be panic-stricken. A moment before all were madly yelling out:
“Forward!” “Victory!” Now they began to turn their backs in disorder.

It was not, though, at the sight of the bayonets. They had seen and
heard something else. The thundering beat of approaching horse-hoofs
shook the ground.

With a trampling turmoil of horse-hoofs the cavalrymen of the British
Union Brigade burst on the scene, galloping forward from their former
post in rear of Picton’s infantry. The Scots Greys were on the left;
the Inniskillings in the centre; the Royal Dragoons on the right.

Marcognet’s men heard their approach, and the next moment saw the
horsemen coming at them. The unexpected sight startled and staggered
them; and some of those in the front line gave way. The alarm spread
at once, as most of the rest realised what was approaching. The whole
column swayed to and fro violently. Then it lost cohesion and began to
roll back in mingled ranks down-hill.

A moment later the Greys were among them. “The smoke in which the head
of the French column was enshrouded had not cleared away when the Greys
dashed into the mass.

“Highlanders and Greys charged together, while shrill and wild from
the Highland ranks sounded the mountain pipe, mingled with shouts of
‘Scotland for ever!’” So an officer describes. The men of the 92nd
seized hold of the stirrup-leathers of the horsemen, and charged with
them. “All rushed forward, leaving none but the disabled in their
rear.”

[Illustration: WATERLOO

The Charge of the Union Brigade]

[Sidenote: A SHOUT OF “ATTENTION! CAVALRY!”]

“The dragoons,” describes Captain Siborne, “having the advantage of
the descent, appeared to mow down the mass, which, bending under the
pressure, quickly spread itself outwards in all directions. Yet in
that mass were many gallant spirits who could not be brought to yield
without a struggle; and these fought bravely to the death.”

Says some one on the French side: “We heard a shout of ‘Attention!
Cavalry!’ Almost at the same instant a crowd of red dragoons mounted on
grey horses swept down upon us like the wind. Those who had straggled
were cut to pieces without mercy. They did not fall upon our columns to
ride through and break us up--we were too deep and massive for that;
but they came down between the divisions, slashing right and left with
their sabres and spurring their horses into the flanks of the columns
to cut them in two. Though they did not succeed in this, they killed
great numbers and threw us into confusion.”

The foremost French battalion of Marcognet’s column was the 45th of
the Line, one of Napoleon’s favourite corps, recruited in the capital,
and always spoken of by him as “Mes braves Enfants de Paris.” Said he
of them indeed once, when pointing them out to the Russian Envoy at
the grand review of June 1810: “Mark those soldiers, Prince: that is
my 45th--my brave children of Paris! If ever cartridges are burned
between my brother the Emperor of Russia and me, I will show him the
efficiency of my 45th. It was they who stormed your Russian batteries
at Austerlitz. They are scamps [“des vauriens”] off duty, but lions
on campaign; you should see their dash, their intrepidity; above all,
their cheerfulness under fire!” Small men--“ideal voltigeurs” Napoleon
also called the 45th--they stood a poor chance against the stalwart
swordsmen of the Scots Greys.

[Illustration: THE FIGHT FOR THE STANDARD.

Sergeant Ewart of the Scots Greys taking the Eagle of the 45th at
Waterloo.

From the picture by R. Andsell, A.R.A., at Royal Hospital, Chelsea.]

It was they who were to yield up the first of our British
Eagle-trophies of Waterloo. The prize fell to a non-commissioned
officer of the Greys, Sergeant Charles Ewart, a Kilmarnock man, who
achieved the feat of taking it single-handed. Ewart, an athletic fellow
of splendid physique and herculean strength, six feet four in his
stockings, and a notable _sabreur_, was plunging through the struggling
press of infantry, slashing out to right and left, when he caught sight
of the Eagle of the 45th, with its gorgeous new silken flag, bearing
the glittering inscription in letters of gold--“Austerlitz, Jena,
Friedland, Essling, Wagram.” It was being hurried away to the rear for
safety in the middle of a small band of devoted men who surrounded
it, and were fighting hard with their bayonets to keep the British
off. Sergeant Ewart saw that and rode straight for the Eagle-bearer.
Parrying the bayonet-thrusts at him as he got up, he cut down the
French officer who carried the Eagle, and then had a fight with two
others. These, first one and then the other, were killed or disabled
by the sergeant, who in the end carried off the splendid trophy
triumphantly.

[Sidenote: HOW EWART TOOK THE EAGLE]

Ewart himself, in a letter to his father, tells his own story of the
taking of the Eagle:

“He and I had a hard contest for it. He thrust for my groin; I parried
it off and cut him through the head, after which I was attacked by one
of their lancers, who threw his lance at me, but missed the mark by my
throwing it off with my sword, at my right side. Then I cut him from
the chin upwards, which went through his teeth. Next I was attacked by
a foot-soldier, who, after firing at me, charged me with his bayonet;
but he very soon lost the combat, for I parried it and cut him down
through the head. That finished the contest for the Eagle.”

Napoleon was watching the progress of the fight through his glasses. He
witnessed the charge of the Scots Greys--unaware, of course, that it
was his pet “Enfants de Paris” who were undergoing their fate. “Qu’ils
sont terribles ces chevaux gris!” was the exclamation that, according
to the guide De Coster, fell from Napoleon’s lips at the sight. The
Greys cut his unlucky 45th to pieces, and had overthrown the rest of
Marcognet’s Division in three minutes. “In three minutes,” says a
British officer in the charge, “the column was totally overthrown and
numbers of them taken prisoners.”

Sabring their way through the remnants of the 45th, and leaving the
prisoners to be secured by the Highlanders, the Greys then charged the
supporting regiment, the 25th of the Line. These, “lost in amazement
at the suddenness and wildness of the charge and its terrific effect
on their comrades on the higher ground in front,” were caught in the
act of trying to form square. Some of them fired a few shots at the
dragoons, but the impetus of the first charge carried the Greys in
among them with a rush, driving in the foremost ranks and making the
rest of the column in rear roll back and break up. In panic and despair
they threw down their muskets and, according to a British officer,
“surrendered in crowds.” The Eagle of the 25th, however, was saved.
It was carried safely off the field, and is now one of the Napoleonic
relics at the Invalides.

Ewart was at once sent to Brussels with the trophy, and on his arrival
carried it through the crowded streets “amidst the acclamations of
thousands of spectators who saw it.” He was given an ensigncy in the
3rd Royal Veteran Battalion in recognition of his exploit. The sword he
used at Waterloo is now among the treasures of Chelsea Hospital, and
Ewart’s old regiment bears embroidered on its standard a French Eagle,
with the legend “Waterloo.”[44]

[Sidenote: THE CHARGE OF THE “ROYALS”]

Within a few moments of Sergeant Ewart capturing the Eagle of the 45th,
an officer of the Royal Dragoons, Captain A. K. Clark (afterwards Sir
A. K. Clark-Kennedy) took, also in hand-to-hand fight, the other Eagle
sent home by Wellington from Waterloo--that of the 105th of the Line,
the leading regiment of Bourgeois’ Brigade.

The Royals, on the right of the Union Brigade, came down on the French
left column. That, as yet, had had no enemy in front of it, and was
advancing with cheers and shouts of triumph across the crest-line of
the ridge. It overlapped and extended beyond the flank of what had been
Picton’s line, and so far had only been fired at from a distance by
artillery and part of the 95th. Suddenly the French were startled by
the apparition of a mass of cavalry quite near; coming on within eighty
or ninety yards of them--emerging from the battle-smoke at a gallop.

The sight took them completely by surprise. The loud shouts of
triumph stopped abruptly. “The head of the column,” describes one of
the Royals, “appeared to be seized with a panic, gave us a fire which
brought down about twenty men, went instantly about, and endeavoured
to regain the opposite side of the hedges.” They had just crossed the
Wavre road along the slope, about halfway up.

It was the men of one corps, the 105th of the Line, who so turned back.
They, of all in the regiments of Napoleon’s army, knew what it was to
be charged by cavalry. They had had one fearful experience of what
cold steel in strong hands could do, and wanted no second. They were
the same 105th whom Wellington’s Hanoverian Dragoons, in the pursuit
after Salamanca, had ridden down and slaughtered so mercilessly. Once
more the fearful fate was about to overtake them--was at hand, was on
them! In the ranks were many veterans who had served in the 105th in
Spain before 1814, and had rejoined on Napoleon’s return from Elba.
The slaughter after Salamanca was a grim and horrifying memory in the
regiment that every man shuddered to recall. It all came back vividly
to them now, as the flashing sabres of the Royal Dragoons burst into
view, making for them across the ridge. The whole regiment gave back
and broke, turning for help to the supporting 28th in rear.

But they were not able to reach their refuge in time. Without drawing
rein the Royals pressed home their charge. They were into the 105th in
a moment, cutting them down on all sides.

[Sidenote: HOW THE SECOND EAGLE WAS TAKEN]

In that _mêlée_ the Eagle of the 105th met its fate. Captain
Clark-Kennedy himself describes how that came about--how he came to
take the Eagle. He was in command of the centre squadron, leading
through the thick of the ill-fated infantrymen.

“I did not see the Eagle and Colour (for there were two Colours, but
only one with an Eagle) until we had been probably five or six minutes
engaged. It must, I should think, have been originally about the centre
of the column, and got uncovered from the change of direction. When I
first saw it, it was perhaps about forty yards to my left, and a little
in my front. The officer who carried it, and his companions, were
moving with their backs towards me, and endeavouring to force their way
through the crowd.

“I gave the order to my squadron, ‘Right shoulders forward! Attack the
Colour!’ leading direct on the point myself. On reaching it I ran my
sword into the officer’s right side, a little above the hip-joint. He
was a little to my left side, and he fell to that side, with the Eagle
across my horse’s head. I tried to catch it with my left hand, but
could only touch the fringe of the flag; and it is probable it would
have fallen to the ground, had it not been prevented by the neck of
Corporal Styles’ horse, who came close up on my left at the instant,
and against which it fell. Corporal Styles was standard-coverer: his
post was immediately behind me, and his duty to follow wherever I led.

“When I first saw the Eagle, I gave the order ‘Right shoulders forward!
Attack the Colour!’ and on running the officer through the body I
called out twice together, ‘Secure the Colour! Secure the Colour! It
belongs to me!’ This order was addressed to some men close to me, of
whom Corporal Styles was one.

“On taking up the Eagle I endeavoured to break the Eagle off the pole,
with the intention of putting it into the breast of my coat, but I
could not break it. Corporal Styles said, ‘Pray, sir, do not break it,’
on which I replied, ‘Very well. Carry it to the rear as fast as you
can. It belongs to me!’”

Taking hold of the Eagle, Corporal Styles turned away. He had a fight
to get through with it, and had, we are told, literally to cut his way
back to safety.

Captain Clark-Kennedy, who received two wounds and had two horses
killed under him, was given the C.B. He was granted later, as an
augmentation to his family arms, the representation of a Napoleonic
Eagle and flag; with for crest a “demi-dragoon holding a flag with an
Eagle on it.” Corporal Styles was appointed to an ensigncy in the West
India Regiment. The Royal Dragoons wear the device of a Napoleonic
Eagle as collar-badge, and bear an Eagle embroidered on their standard.

[Sidenote: WHERE ANOTHER FLAG WAS FOUND]

As with the 45th, so with the 105th--both battalions of each regiment
lost their colours; the regimental Eagle and the “fanion” of the second
battalion. The “fanion” of the 105th, described as “a dark blue silken
flag, with on it the words ‘105me Régiment d’Infanterie de Ligne,’”
came into British possession in a manner that is not clear. It was not
taken in fight by the Royals. Was it picked up on the field after the
battle by some camp-follower and sold? Its existence and whereabouts
remained unknown until some twenty-four years afterwards. As it
happened, curiously, General Clark-Kennedy, as he then was, himself
lighted upon it by chance, hanging in the hall of Sir Walter Scott’s
home at Abbotsford. How it got there, in spite of all inquiries, the
general was unable to discover.

Two other Eagles, it would appear, had adventures at Waterloo.

One, according to an unconfirmed story, was taken and lost by the
Inniskillings, who charged the 54th and 55th of the Line, stationed
at the rear of Bourgeois’ Brigade, just after the Royals attacked the
leading battalion of that column. A trooper named Penfold claimed to
have taken the Eagle of one of the two regiments. “After we charged,”
he said, “I saw an Eagle which I rode up to, and seized hold of it.
The man who bore it would not give it up, and I dragged him along by
it for a considerable distance. Then the pole broke about the middle,
and I carried off the Eagle. Immediately after that I saw a comrade,
Hassard, in difficulties, and, giving the Eagle to a young soldier of
the Inniskillings, I went to his aid. The Eagle got dropped and lost.”

The second of these two Eagles is said to have been captured by the
Blues, the Royal Horse Guards, and then lost in much the same way. “A
private in the Blues,” records Wellington’s Supplemental Despatches,
“killed a French officer and took an Eagle; but his own horse being
killed, he could not keep it.” A French officer also mentions the
taking of the Eagle by the Blues and its recovery.

About the time that the ill-fated 45th of the Line and the 105th lost
their Eagles in front of Picton’s Division, another Eagle elsewhere had
a narrow escape from capture, being saved by its colonel’s personal
act. That took place in front of Hougoumont, with the Eagle of the
1st of the Line. The regiment was in Jerome Bonaparte’s Division in
front of Hougoumont, and had made an attack on the outbuildings of
the château, which the defenders had beaten off. At the last moment,
as the French assault recoiled, the Eagle-bearer and his two fellows
were shot down together. The battalion fell back, leaving the Eagle
lying on the ground in the open, beside its dead guardians. For the
moment, apparently, the British defenders did not see the trophy thus
left within their reach. Before they did so Colonel Cubières, of the
1st of the Line, discovered its loss and saw where it had fallen. He
ran out by himself, picked up the Eagle, and, escaping harm of any
kind, carried it back to the regiment. According to M. Thiers, “the
English officers checked the fire of their men while the deed was being
performed, in admiration of his courage”--an interesting detail in the
story if true!


THE LAST ATTACK AND AFTER: THE EAGLES OF THE GUARD

[Sidenote: THE EAGLES OF THE GUARD]

In the third episode in the story of Waterloo we strike another note.
How the Eagles of the Guard fared in the closing hour of the battle,
when Napoleon staked his last desperate throw and lost--that final
phase remains to tell.

Fourteen Eagles of the Guard were on the field. All came safely through
the battle and survived the risks and perils of the night retreat that
followed, to recross the frontier with the rallied remnants of the
stricken host. Only three, however, are now in existence: one at the
Invalides; the other two in private keeping in France. The remaining
eleven were, some of them at any rate, destroyed by the officers
on the final disbanding of the Grand Army, refusing to give them up
to the emissaries of the Bourbon _régime_ sent to receive them for
conveyance to Vincennes, where as many as could be got hold of among
the regimental Eagles underwent their fate by fire.

Five Eagles went forward in the great last-hope attack of the Guard
against the centre of Wellington’s position, the overthrow of which
cost Napoleon the battle. They were the Eagles of the 3rd and 4th
Grenadiers of the Guard, and of three regiments of the Chasseurs of
the Guard, the 1st, 3rd, and 4th. All five are among those that have
disappeared since Waterloo.

Close beside the Eagle of the 3rd Grenadiers it was that Marshal Ney
fought so heroically, as he led in person the historic grand attack of
the Imperial Guard. His fifth horse was shot under Ney in the advance,
and he then drew his sword and strode forward on foot alongside the
Eagle-bearer. So he led until the column reeled back and broke under
the sudden attack of the British Guards across the crest-line of the
slope. At that moment Ney lost his footing, and fell in the confusion.
“He disappeared,” says a French officer, “just at the moment that
the Guard gave way. But he was up again in a moment, and with voice
and gesture strove his hardest to rally them.” It was to no purpose.
The great column wavered, swayed, and then fell apart in disorder.
“Mitraillée, fusillée, reduit à quinze ou seize cent hommes, la
Garde recule!” Ney was swept off his feet in the retreat, and borne
backwards; carried away in the rush of the fugitives, struggling
helplessly in the crowd. “Bathed in perspiration, his eyes blazing with
indignation, foaming at the mouth, his uniform torn open, one of his
epaulets cut away by a sabre-slash, his star of the Legion of Honour
dented by a bullet, bleeding, muddy, heroic, holding a broken sword in
his hand, he shouted to the men, ‘See how a Marshal of France dies on
the battlefield!’ But it was in vain: he did not die.”

[Sidenote: NEY’S LAST HEROIC EFFORT]

Then Ney, mounting a trooper’s horse, made for a regiment near, whose
men were falling back in fair order, with their Eagle borne defiantly
in their midst--the 8th of the Line. With them was a battalion of
the 95th, also displaying their Eagle gallantly as they, too, tried
to withdraw in regular formation. Ney made them face about, and put
himself at their head. He appealed to them in the words he had used
just before, when trying to rally the Guard: “Suivez moi, camarades. Je
vais vous montrer comment meurt un Maréchal de France sur le champ de
bataille!” The men turned to face the enemy, with a shout of “Vive le
Maréchal Ney!” They charged forward towards where some of the red-coats
of Kempt’s and Pack’s infantry showed themselves in the van of the
pursuers. But at the same instant some horsemen of a Prussian hussar
regiment dashed at them at a gallop. The sight of the horsemen was too
much for their shattered nerves. They turned their backs and ran off
panic-stricken. Ney’s last rallied band broke and fled, with cries of
“Sauve qui peut!”

Yet not quite all. A small band of the men of the 8th kept round their
Eagle, and retired in order, still holding it up. _Chef de Bataillon_
Rullière, of the 95th, snatched the Eagle of that regiment from its
bearer, broke the staff, and carried off the Eagle concealed under his
coat.

Ney’s sixth horse was shot under him as the men turned. Again getting
to his feet he staggered on in the midst of the crowd of fugitives
until he at last found his way into one of the rallying squares formed
in rear by some of the survivors of the Guard. There now, beside the
Eagle of the 4th Chasseurs of the Guard, Ney made his last stand at
Waterloo--at bay, desperate. He fought in the square, “shoulder to
shoulder with the rest, shooting and thrusting with a musket and
bayonet he got hold of,” as the square slowly made its retreat off the
field, until in the darkness it broke up, and the men dispersed. The
devotion of a mounted officer who met the marshal on foot, utterly worn
out and by himself, and gave up his horse to him, enabled Ney in the
end to reach a place of safety.

Napoleon was watching the Second Column of the Guard at the moment
of its disaster. How the overwhelming catastrophe burst on his gaze,
abruptly and all unexpectedly, makes one of the most dramatic of
historic scenes. At that moment Napoleon was about to lead in person
the reserve of the Guard, three battalions which he had retained near
him throughout, to reinforce the fighting line.

“While they were being marshalled for the attack--one battalion
deployed, with a battalion in close column on either side--he kept his
glass turned upon the conflict in which he intended to bear a part.

“Suddenly his hand fell.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON IS HORROR-STRICKEN]

“‘Mais ils sont mêlée!’ he ejaculated in a tone of horror, his voice
hollow and quavering. He addressed his aide de camp, Count Flahault,
who was under no illusion as to what troops were meant. The sun had
just set. There was no radiance to prevent all men seeing what was
going on out there in the north-west.”

Immediately on that followed the general collapse: the almost
instantaneous break up of the French army all along the line.

“First the trampled corn in rear was sprinkled, then it was covered,
with a confused mass of men moving south; behind and among them the
sabres of Vivian’s hussars and Vandeleur’s dragoons rose and fell,
hacking and hewing on every side.

“‘La Garde recule!’ sounded like a sob in the motionless ranks of
the Old Guard (the three battalions near Napoleon), and sped with
astonishing swiftness to every part of the field. ‘La Garde recule!’
cried the men of Allix, Donzelot, and Marcognet, and began to melt
away from the vantage ground they had recently so nobly won. ‘La Garde
recule!’ whispered Reille’s columns, still unbroken on the left. Far
on the right, Durutte’s battalions, suddenly confronted by the heads
of Ziethen’s columns, where they had been told to look for Grouchy’s,
caught up the word. Next, the uneasy murmur, ‘Nous sommes trahis!’ was
heard--for was there not treason? Had not General Bourmont and his
staff, and other officers, openly gone over to the enemy? ‘La Garde
recule!’ Oh fatal cry! soon swelling into one still more dreadful--last
tocsin of the soldier’s agony--‘Sauve qui peut!’ Papelotte and La Haye
were abandoned, and from the east, as already from the west, the wreck
of the Last Army rolled towards the Charleroi road.”

The Eagle that was close beside Napoleon at that most awful moment of
his life, as he saw his Guard break and fall back in confusion, is at
the Invalides now. It is the Eagle of the 2nd Grenadiers of the Guard;
one of the three reserve battalions that were forming up to go forward
at the moment of the catastrophe.

[Illustration: WATERLOO

THE FINAL PHASE

Sketch Plan to show the attack and the defeat of the columns of the
Guard.]

Napoleon watched the panic begin to spread over the field for a brief
moment. Then he roused himself to try to meet the impending crash.
First he formed the Guard battalions nearest him into square. Then he
sent off his last remaining gallopers, in the futile hope that it might
be possible to rally the men of the nearest divisions to him before
they had time to scatter. But the effort was hopeless: it was beyond
possibility to stem the raging torrent of frantic soldiers, now in full
flight on every side, racing past in the direction of Jemmapes. The lie
that he had sent round just before the Guard started on its charge,
that Grouchy had arrived, recoiled on his own head. The panic-stricken
soldiers would not be stopped. “They had been told that Grouchy had
arrived. They had found instead Ziethen’s terrible Prussians. Now they
would listen to nothing. The fugitives streamed past, rushing on and
bellowing as they went that they had been betrayed and that all was
lost!”

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON SHELTERS IN A SQUARE]

After that Napoleon rode into the nearest square, and took shelter in
its midst. It was that of the Second Battalion of the 2nd Chasseurs
of the Guard. The square moved off at once towards La Belle Alliance,
and, turning there into the Charleroi road, took its way back towards
Rossomme, half a mile in rear, where the two battalions of the 1st and
2nd Grenadiers of the Old Guard had remained all day.

At Rossomme Napoleon passed to the square of the First Battalion of the
1st Grenadiers of the Old Guard. The two battalions of the Guard there
had already formed in squares of their own accord, with their Eagles
held on high in their midst. They were joined by the 1st Chasseurs of
the Guard, coming up from Caillou, a short distance in rear. The three
squares held their ground firmly, beating off the headmost of the
Prussian attacks. They remained halted until, on some of the Prussian
artillery nearing the place, Napoleon himself gave the order to move
away in retreat.

At a slow step, the drums rolling out the stately “Grenadier’s March,”
sullen and defiant, the Old Guard, with Napoleon in the midst of the
square of the 1st Grenadiers, set forth on their last journey. Their
Eagle was still borne on high in their midst--close beside Napoleon.
It is the Eagle that is now treasured in Paris by the descendants of
General Petit, the commander of the Grenadiers at Waterloo--the Eagle
of the Adieu of Fontainebleau; the same Eagle that led the Guard at
Austerlitz and Jena, at Eylau and Friedland, at Wagram, and throughout
all the horrors of the retreat from Moscow. It escorted Napoleon off
the field after Waterloo.

[Illustration: THE SQUARE OF THE OLD GUARD AT BAY AFTER WATERLOO.

From the picture by H. Bellangé.]

[Sidenote: THE OLD GUARD MARCH AWAY]

The Grenadiers of the Guard escorted Napoleon for four miles from the
battlefield, beating back repeated efforts that were made by Prussian
cavalry to break up their ranks. To maintain their formation to the
last was their only hope of safety; and terrible were the measures
they took to safeguard themselves and keep their ranks intact. Friend
or foe who attempted to get in among them was mercilessly shot down.
“Nous tirons,” describes General Petit, “sur tout ce qui presentaient,
amis et ennemis, de peur de laisser entrer les uns avec les autres.”
They took their way along the Charleroi road; the 2nd Grenadiers
marching on the _chaussée_ itself, the 1st Grenadiers to the left of
the road. With marvellous calmness and cool courage did the veterans
proceed on their way. “Every few minutes they stopped to rectify the
alignment of the faces of the square, and to keep off pursuit by means
of rapid and well-sustained musketry.”

Erckmann-Chatrian’s soldier of the 25th, who was amongst the fugitives
streaming across country on either side of the high-road, tells how
he heard from afar the stately drum-beat of their march. “In the
distance _La Grenadière_ sounded like an alarm-bell in the midst of a
conflagration. Yet, indeed, this was much more terrible--it was the
last drum-beat of France! This rolling of the drums of the Old Guard
sounding forth in the midst of disaster had in it something infinitely
pathetic as well as terrible.”

And of the scene with Napoleon in the square of the Grenadiers as it
tramped its way along, we have this from Thiers: “With sombre but calm
countenance, he rode in the centre of the square, his far-seeing glance
as it were probing futurity and realising that more than a battle
had been lost that day. He only interrupted his gloomy meditations to
inquire now and again for his lieutenants, some of whom were among
the wounded near him. The soldiers all round seemed stupefied by the
disaster. The men moved stolidly on, almost without a word to one
another. Napoleon alone seemed to be able to speak; occasionally
addressing a few words to the Major-General (Soult), or to his brother
Jerome, who rode beside him. Now and again, when harassed by the
Prussian squadrons, the square would halt, and the side that was
attacked fired on the assailants, after which the sad and silent march
was resumed.”

Throughout the march, keeping their position at a little distance
from the squares of the Grenadiers, rode the Horse-Grenadiers and the
Mounted Chasseurs of the Guard. One of the finest displays of soldierly
endurance ever made, perhaps, was that given by the Horse-Grenadiers
of the Guard as the magnificent regiment left the field, “moving at a
walk, in close columns and in perfect order; as if disdaining to allow
itself to be contaminated by the confusion that prevailed around it.”
So describes a British officer who saw them ride away. They beat off
all attacks and kept steadily and compactly together. “They literally
walked from the field in the most orderly manner, moving majestically
along, with their Eagle in their midst, as though merely marching to
take up their ground for a field-day.” This, further, is what a British
officer of Light Dragoons, who came up with them in the pursuit, says
of their heroic demeanour: “Seeing the men of our brigade approach,
they halted, formed line, and fired a volley--a rare thing for
dragoons--and waited a few minutes, as much as to say, ‘We are ready to
receive your charge if you are so disposed’; then finding we did not
advance, they again continued their slow retreat.”

[Sidenote: A FAMOUS EAGLE NOW IN FRANCE]

The Eagle of the Horse-Grenadiers has disappeared since Waterloo: that
of the Mounted Chasseurs of the Guard is in existence, in France, in
the custody of a member of the Bonaparte family. It was preserved by
General Lefebvre-Desnouettes, Colonel-in-Chief of the regiment, who
commanded the Chasseurs at Waterloo. Carried in safety to France, the
Eagle was then taken to America, when the General, on whose head a
price had been placed, escaped across the Atlantic in the autumn of
1815. He presented it later to Joseph Bonaparte, in the possession of
whose representatives the Eagle is now. It still bears attached to the
staff the green silk guidon-shaped flag, inscribed “Chasseurs de la
Garde,” and embroidered with gold and silver laurel-leaves, which it
bore at Waterloo.

Napoleon quitted the square of Grenadiers about two miles from
Jemmapes. By that time the Prussians had ceased their attacks on the
Guard for easier prey elsewhere. He rode on at a little distance
ahead; the battalions of the Guard at the same time re-forming into
columns of march. They kept with the Emperor until the neighbourhood of
Jemmapes was reached. There Napoleon and Soult and the others quitted
the road, betaking themselves across the fields to make their way as
best they could to Charleroi, whence Napoleon was able to continue his
flight in a post-chaise.

Yet another of the Waterloo Eagles of the Guard with a story to be told
of it was that of the 2nd Chasseurs--one of the Eagles that have now
disappeared. How the Eagle was saved from capture, and finally brought
through to safety, recalls a remarkable and dramatic incident of the
battle.

The 2nd Chasseurs was one of the twelve battalions of the Young Guard
detached by Napoleon late in the afternoon to assist General Lobau and
the Sixth Army Corps to keep off the Prussian flank attack. Between
them they saved the army from an even worse catastrophe than that which
actually befell Napoleon at Waterloo--from having to surrender. For
nearly an hour after the rout had become general, the Sixth Corps,
and the battalions of the Young Guard assisting it, by their heroic
resistance, prevented the Prussians from breaking in on the only line
of retreat open to the defeated army, and enabled Napoleon to get clear
away.

[Sidenote: TO SAVE THE REST OF THE ARMY]

“Lobau,” to quote the words of a modern military writer, “recognised
to the full that he alone interposed between the Prussians and the
French line of retreat. If he failed, retreat would be cut off, and the
army taken in rear as well as in front and flank; not a man would get
away. The fate of the Army, the Emperor, of France, rested on Lobau at
the supreme moment, and splendidly he did his duty. Dusk had given way
to dark, only illuminated by the blazing ruins of Planchenoit, before
Lobau retired, but by that time the rear of the flying army had cleared
the point of peril, and comparative safety was assured. Still steady,
and in good order, he took post on the high-road to close the line of
flight and block pursuit, and the gallant remnant of the Sixth Corps
and the Young Guard had to bear the full fury of the combined advance
of the enemy. Nothing at Waterloo can surpass for coolness, courage,
and determination the heroic resistance of Lobau.”

It was in the village of Planchenoit that the 2nd Chasseurs fought
side by side with the other battalions of the Guard in that quarter
under the leadership of General Pelet, to whom Napoleon had specially
entrusted the defence of the post. Planchenoit was defended foot by
foot at the point of the bayonet against ever-increasing numbers of the
Prussians. The 2nd Chasseurs were the last troops of all to quit, after
contesting the village house by house, cottage by cottage, fighting the
Prussians man to man among the bushes and walls of the gardens, and
finally in the churchyard, where they made their last stand at bay,
desperately combating among the tombstones. Fresh Prussians kept coming
up to join in the attack, but the 2nd Chasseurs, their Eagle defiantly
displayed in the midst of the battling throng, resisted stubbornly.
When at the last they drew off, the whole of Planchenoit was a mass of
flames, blazing from end to end.

There remained a rough half-mile of open ground before they could get
to the Charleroi road--the line of retreat along which, by that time,
a large proportion of the fugitives from the main army had got away.
The 2nd Chasseurs, in rear of all, as they left their last shelter in
Planchenoit and were beyond the churchyard walls, were swept down on
by a furious rush of Prussian cavalry, and half the regiment was cut
to pieces. The moon was rising by that time, and the Prussians had
sufficient light for their deadly work.

The survivors, broken up, and thrown in irremediable disorder, could
after that only run for their lives. But they still bore their Eagle
among them. It was draped under a black cloth. Somebody, in some house
in the village, as they were falling back to the churchyard, had, it
would appear, caught up a strip of crape or black cloth, and hastily
wrapped it round the Eagle to conceal it in that way from hostile
eyes. The Eagle-bearer refused to break the Eagle from the staff, and
hide it under his coat, as others had done elsewhere with other Eagles.

With the Eagle so covered, a small party of devoted soldiers were
accompanying their standard as the survivors of the Prussian charge
hastened towards the Charleroi road, when there came yet another attack
from the Prussian horse, who charged among them and trampled them down
as the troopers slashed mercilessly at the fugitives. At that moment
the Eagle and its guardians found themselves near the General. They
were isolated and cut off in the midst of the wild _mêlée_. Pelet
caught sight of them, desperately striving to protect the Eagle-bearer,
who was frantically clutching at the Eagle-staff as he held on to it
and tried to get through.

[Sidenote: “SAVE YOUR EAGLE OR DIE ROUND IT!”]

Pelet made for the group, shouting at the top of his voice: “Rally,
Chasseurs! Rally on me! Save your Eagle or die round it!” (“A moi,
Chasseurs! A moi! Sauvons l’Aigle ou mourons autour d’elle!”)

In the midst of the frenzied tumult his cry for help was somehow heard
by the men ahead. They turned back in their flight and fought their
way to the threatened Eagle. Others pressed round to join them, until
by degrees was formed a compact body between two and three hundred in
number, who with their bayonets kept the cavalry back as they fought
their way towards the high-road step by step.

More than once they had to halt and face about, as the Prussian
horsemen in their repeated attempts to capture the Eagle circled round
them, and dashed in at them again and again, but, “forming what is
usually termed a rallying square, and lowering their bayonets, they
succeeded in repulsing the charges of the cavalry.” At one point in the
retreat “some guns were brought to bear upon them, and subsequently a
brisk fire of musketry; but notwithstanding the awful sacrifice which
was thus offered up in defence of their precious charge, they succeeded
in reaching the main line of retreat, and saved alike the Eagle and the
Honour of the Regiment.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The Eagles of the Guard all came safely through the turmoil and horrors
of the night of the rout after Waterloo. And--it seems incredible, but
the fact is vouched for by several officers--so did the other Eagles of
the army. All at Waterloo, it is declared, were brought back to France,
except the two taken from the ill-fated 45th and the 105th of the Line
by the Scots Greys and the Royals. Those two only remained as trophies
in the hands of the victors. General Charras, whose good faith we have
no right to impugn, declares the fact in explicit language, and another
officer relates how, on the day after the battle, when the rallied
remains of the army assembled at Phillippeville and Maubeuge, “the
soldiers wept tears of joy at learning how many of their Eagles had
been saved.”

[Sidenote: “MAKE WAY FOR THE EAGLE!”]

Says General Charras, describing how the Eagles were saved that night:
“Two standards had been lost on the battlefield. There was none other
lost. In the crowd of disbanded horsemen and foot-soldiers, marching
and running pell-mell, some still armed, others having thrown away or
broken their sabres and guns under the impulse of rage, of despair, of
terror, there were to be seen, by the pale light of the moon, little
groups of officers of every grade, and of soldiers, spontaneously
collected round the standard of each regiment, and advancing sabre in
hand, bayonet on the gun, resolute and imperturbable in the midst of
the general disorder. ‘Place au drapeau!’ cried they when the rout
arrested their march, and this cry always sufficed to cause the very
men who had become deaf to every word of command and to all discipline
to stand aside before them and open a passage. They had often to endure
peril, they had often to repulse the enemy’s attacks, but they saved
their conquered flags from the attempts and hands of the conqueror.”

Grouchy also saved all his Eagles--although one had its adventures in
the attack on Wavre, and was nearly lost to the Prussians. The story
this time is not exactly creditable to some of those concerned; but
the regiment in question, it must be said, had but few old soldiers in
its ranks, having been made up almost entirely of recently levied and
half-trained conscripts. Also, it had just previously been very roughly
handled by the Prussians on the battlefield of Ligny. There, indeed, it
had been charged by cavalry, and had suffered severely. The unfortunate
regiment was the 70th of the Line.

In Grouchy’s fighting at Wavre they were in Vandamme’s Division, which
had orders to carry the bridge over the Dyle and storm the town, held
by the Prussians in considerable force. To give the 70th a chance of
getting their revenge for Ligny, and winning back the old good name
of the regiment, Vandamme specially chose them for the post of honour
in the attack; appointing the 70th to lead the van in the preliminary
storming of the bridge. They led the attack, dashing forward bravely
enough at the outset, and got halfway across. Then they stopped short,
their ranks decimated by the furious fire with which the Prussians
received them from the houses on the opposite bank, hesitated, went on
a few paces, stopped again, and finally ran back in panic.

[Sidenote: SAVED BY ANOTHER REGIMENT]

The sight of the sudden rout maddened their leader, Colonel Maury.
Stooping from his charger, he snatched hold of the Eagle from its
bearer, and held it up before the men. “What! you scoundrels! You
dishonoured me two days ago; you are again disgracing me to-day!
Forward! Follow me!” (“Comment, canaille! Vous m’avez deshonoré
avant-hier, et vous recidiviez aujourdhui! En avant! Suivez moi!”)
Brandishing the Eagle the colonel turned his horse to ride back across
the bridge. The drums beat the charge: the regiment followed. But all
was to no purpose. As fate willed it, the gallant colonel fell, shot
dead before he could get across, and at the sight of his fall panic
again seized the regiment. They ran wildly back again, leaving the dead
colonel’s body and the Eagle lying halfway across the bridge. The Eagle
was rescued and brought back by the men of another regiment. Had it not
been for the sudden rush forward of the leading company of the 22nd of
the Line, the regiment supporting the 70th in the attack, the Eagle
would have been taken. Several Prussian soldiers had indeed already
run forward to pick it up, and their leader was in the act of doing so
when the foremost of the rescuers arrived, beat back the Prussians, and
recovered the fallen Eagle.

The failure of this one regiment at Wavre is the only recorded instance
of bad behaviour before the enemy in the Waterloo campaign. And for
it too, in view of the composition of the regiment in question, some
allowance may surely be made.


THE EAGLES ANNOUNCE VICTORY TO LONDON

The last of the four episodes is supplemental: the story of how
Wellington’s Eagle-trophies themselves first announced Waterloo to
London.

The two Eagles were sent to England immediately after the battle,
together with Wellington’s Waterloo despatch, by Major the Hon. Henry
Percy, of the 11th Light Dragoons, who was almost the only member of
Wellington’s staff who went through the battle unwounded. He arrived
in London, displaying the Eagles from his post-chaise as he travelled
through the streets, on the stroke of eleven o’clock on the night of
Wednesday, June 21.

Up to then not a word had come from Wellington: not a word of reliable
news as to what had happened had reached England. Rumours of an early
check to the French had arrived, from unofficial sources, during the
previous day, but nothing more had been heard, and all London was on
tenterhooks of suspense.

[Sidenote: THE FIRST RUMOURS IN LONDON]

The battle was fought on Sunday the 18th. But no news of it, or in
regard to it, of any kind reached England during either Monday or
Tuesday. There was no intelligence from the seat of war at all. On
the Wednesday morning the _Times_ announced vaguely that Napoleon had
struck the first blow unsuccessfully. A Mr. Sutton, of Colchester, it
said, the owner of packet-boats running between Harwich and Ostend,
had forwarded a message to the effect that there had been fighting on
the 15th and 16th and skirmishing on the 17th, and that a fresh battle
was beginning on the morning of the 18th. His informant at Brussels had
sent that news. There was no more news until Wednesday afternoon, when
the _Sun_ came out with a special edition stating that the Government
had received no despatches, but that “a gentleman who left Ghent on
Monday, and two others from Brussels, brought word that Sunday’s battle
had been successful.” All London was in the streets until between ten
and eleven that night, in a state of eager expectation; but repeated
inquiries at the Horse Guards, at the War Office, and at the Mansion
House only met with the answer--“No news yet.”

It was just as the crowds were dispersing, tired of waiting, and taking
it as certain that nothing could be known until the morning, as the
clocks were on the stroke of eleven, that Major Percy arrived in London.

“He left the Duchess of Richmond’s ball,” says his niece, Lady Bagot,
in whose words the story may best be told, “on the night before the
battle, and had no time to change his dress, or even his shoes, before
going into action. When he received orders to go to England with the
despatches, he posted to Antwerp, and there took the first sailing
boat he could find to convey him to Dover, where he landed in the
afternoon. He found that a report of the victory had preceded him
there. The Rothschilds had chartered a fast sloop to lie off Antwerp,
and bring the first news of the battle to the English shore--news which
was to be used for Stock Exchange purposes.

“My uncle’s confirmation of the rumour of a great victory was received
with the greatest relief and enthusiasm. At that time the hotel-keeper
at Dover, a certain Mr. Wright, had the monopoly of the posting
arrangements between that port and London. He immediately placed his
best horses at my uncle’s disposal, and despatched an express to order
fresh relays all along the road. Besides the despatches my uncle took
the two captured Eagles of the Imperial Guard with him. These, being
too large to go into the carriage, were placed so as to stick out of
the windows, one on each side. In this manner he drove straight to
the Horse Guards, where he learnt that the Commander-in-Chief, at
that time the Duke of York, was dining out. He next proceeded to Lord
Castlereagh’s, and was told that he and the Duke of York were both
dining with a lady in St. James’s Square. To this house he drove, and
there learnt that the Prince Regent was also of the dinner-party.

[Sidenote: PRESENTED TO THE PRINCE REGENT]

“Requesting to be shown immediately into the dining-room, he entered
that apartment bearing the despatches and the Eagles with him. He was
covered with dust and mud, and, though unwounded himself, bore the
marks of battle upon his coat. The dessert was being placed upon the
table when he entered, and as soon as the Prince Regent saw him he
commanded the ladies to leave the room. The Prince Regent then held out
his hand, saying, ‘Welcome, Colonel Percy!’ ‘Go down on one knee,’ said
the Duke of York to my uncle, ‘and kiss hands for the step you have
obtained.’ Before the despatch could be read, my uncle was besieged
with inquiries of various prominent officers engaged, and had to answer
‘Dead’ or ‘Severely wounded’ so often that the Prince Regent burst into
tears. The Duke of York, though greatly moved, was more composed.

“By this time my uncle was exhausted from fatigue, and begged the
Prince’s permission to go to his father’s house in Portman Square. The
crowd was so great in St. James’s Square, that he had the greatest
difficulty in getting through it and reaching my grandfather’s house,
which was soon surrounded by anxious multitudes begging for news
of relations and friends. My uncle told them that the victory was
complete, but that the number killed and wounded was very large. He
told them that he would answer more questions next morning.”

The Eagles themselves in fact announced the victory in London. People
in the streets saw the chaise as it passed on its way with its horses
at a gallop, racing at full speed along the Old Kent Road, across
Westminster Bridge, and through Parliament Street to Whitehall, “the
gleaming lamps showing a French Eagle and the French flags projecting
from each window.”

The news spread like wild-fire, and before Colonel Percy could reach
the house where the Prince Regent was dining--Mrs. Boehm’s, in St.
James’s Square--South London was flocking over Westminster Bridge to
Whitehall. The West End heard the news immediately afterwards, and
everybody hurried out again into the streets.

It became quickly known where the chaise had gone after leaving the
Horse Guards, and promptly an ever-increasing crowd hurried off
there. Before the despatch had been read an enormous mass of people
had assembled in St. James’s Square, outside the house. They were
in time to hear the cheering by the company inside the house that
greeted the reading of the despatch; the cheers were instantly echoed
back, accompanied by an outburst of vociferous shouting followed
by a tremendous chorus of “God save the King!” The windows of the
dining-room were open, and a moment later the two Eagles with their
tricolor flags were thrust through. They were held up, with candles
at either side, to show them plainly, so that all might know that the
victory had been decisive.

“For a few minutes dustmen’s bells and watchmen’s rattles were sprung
all over London. Liquor was produced at many a street-corner, and
toasts were drunk to Wellington and confusion to Bonaparte.”[45]

[Sidenote: HOW PARIS HEARD THE NEWS]

The closing scene took place on Thursday, January 18, 1816--on the
“General Thanksgiving Day for the Restoration of Peace.” The two
Eagles were on that day publicly paraded at the Horse Guards and laid
up in the Chapel Royal, Whitehall, with ceremonies similar to those
that attended the reception of the Barrosa and Salamanca trophies.
Again the battalions of the Brigade of Guards in England, with their
bands “in State clothing,” turned out to take part in the display,
the Eagles, as before, being made to march round the square and do
formal obeisance to the British flag by being prostrated in the dust
before the Colour of the King’s Guard of the day, at which sight, as
on the former occasions, both the troops and the crowd of spectators
“instantaneously gave three loud huzzas with the most enthusiastic
feeling.” The Duke of York, as Commander-in-Chief, presided this time
at the parade. Two sergeants of the Grenadier and Third Guards who had
been wounded at Waterloo were selected to carry the Eagles; escorted by
a picked company of eighty-four officers and men “drawn from among the
heroic defenders of Hougoumont on the field of battle.” Lifeguardsmen
and Blues just arrived from the Army of Occupation, in France, assisted
the Foot Guards on parade.

[Sidenote: IN THE CHAPEL ROYAL, WHITEHALL]

The escort entered the Chapel Royal by the two doors in equal
divisions, the band playing and marching up to the steps of the
Communion Table, where they filed off to right and left. As soon as
the band had ceased, the two sergeants bearing the Eagles approached
the Altar and fixed upon it their consecrated banners. Both the
Chaplain-General to the Forces (Archdeacon Owen) and the Bishop of
London, with two Royal Chaplains (“the Rev. Mr. Jones and the Rev. Mr.
Howlett”), officiated in the service; the Bishop preaching a special
sermon, with for his text Psalm xx. verses 7 and 8:

    “_Some trust in chariots and some in horses: but we will remember
    the name of the Lord our God._

    “_They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen and stand
    upright._”

“After the customary blessing, the band played ‘God save the King!’
the whole congregation standing. Among those who attended were a
considerable number of persons of fashion and distinction in public
life, the Dukes of Gloucester and York, and the Earl of Liverpool,
and several officers of the Army and Navy, with many elegant and
distinguished females.”




CHAPTER XIV

AFTER THE DOWNFALL


The remnant of the Waterloo army, as mustered and officially reported
to Paris on July 1, 1815, after it had been withdrawn by convention
with the Allies beyond the Loire, numbered some 23,000 of all arms.[46]
The soldiers had their Eagles with them. The Eagles were still the
standards of the army, although all was over with Napoleon, and he had
set out on his flight from Malmaison to the coast near Rochfort--to
find the _Bellerophon_ awaiting him there.

[Sidenote: PRESENTED AFTER WATERLOO]

The last occasion on which an Eagle of Napoleon’s Army had its part on
parade was one day, near the Loire, with a regiment not at Waterloo.
It was when the news of Napoleon’s abdication reached its colonel. He
was Colonel Bugeaud of the 14th of the Line, in after years the famous
Marshal who gained Algeria for France. As it happened, the 14th had
not long received their Eagle from the “_Champ de Mai_.” It had been
brought by the deputation of the regiment sent to Paris to receive it
at the hands of the Emperor, but had not yet been formally presented on
parade, owing to the regiment being on the march from the south-eastern
frontier of France. The 14th joined the rallied remnants of the
Waterloo army to the south of the Loire, and there Colonel Bugeaud made
the presentation of the Eagle. For the occasion he made use of the
Napoleonic formula of address at such ceremonies, but with a variation
to suit the altered situation. He took the opportunity to remind the
regiment that, if the Chief had fallen, they yet owed allegiance to
their country. “Soldiers of the 14th,” began the colonel, “here is your
Eagle. It is in the name of the nation that I present it to you. If the
Emperor, as it is stated, is no longer our Sovereign, France remains.
It is France who confides this Eagle to you as your standard; it is
ever to be your talisman of victory. Swear that as long as a soldier
of the 14th exists no enemy’s hand shall touch it!” “We swear it!”
responded the soldiers all together, and then the officers stepped
forward in front of the ranks, waving their swords and again shouting,
“We swear it!”

The end for the Eagles of Napoleon came on August 3, 1815. On that
day the Ministerial decree was promulgated, abolishing them and the
tricolor flag, and disbanding the entire Army. The white Bourbon flag
was restored once more, with a new form of Army organisation, which
substituted “Departmental Legions” in the place of regiments. As in
the year before, it was notified that all Eagles were to be sent to
the Artillery dépôt at Vincennes for destruction there, according to
law--the metal of the Eagles to be melted down, their silken tricolor
flags to be burned.

The date of the final disbandment was fixed for September 30, and in
almost every case there was a pathetic scene when the hour came for the
soldiers to take their last farewell of their Eagles. “On the day of
the disbandment,” describes one officer, speaking of his own regiment,
“we all paraded, and the roll was called for the last time. Then the
Eagle was passed solemnly down along the line, the band playing a
funeral march. The officers and soldiers, all in tears, after saluting
it, embraced and kissed the Eagle. It was then escorted back to the
colonel’s quarters to be packed up in a box and forwarded, according to
the official instructions, by carrier to the Ministry of War, thence to
go to Vincennes.”

[Illustration: LA REVUE DES MORTS.

From a picture by R. Demoraine.]

[Sidenote: ON THE DAY OF THE LAST PARADE]

In a few cases, where the senior officers knew that they had nothing
to hope for in the way of consideration from the new _régime_, the
Eagles were publicly broken up at the last parade by the colonels
themselves, with a blacksmith’s hammer or pioneer’s hatchet, and the
silken tricolor flags cut to pieces, after which the metal fragments,
together with the shreds of the flags, were distributed as keepsakes
among officers and men. That being done, all silently dispersed, never
to reassemble. In some other cases, as had happened a twelvemonth
previously, the Eagles disappeared before the last parade--the officers
in the various regiments having arranged for one of themselves to
retain the Eagle of the corps privately, either by agreement or after
drawing lots.

It was in this way that what Napoleonic Eagles and flags are now at the
Invalides came to be there. They were kept hidden by their possessors
until after the Revolution of July, 1830, and then, on the formation
of the present collection of standards and trophies being officially
sanctioned, most of those at present exhibited were brought to light
and presented, either by those who had been treasuring them in secret,
or by their heirs and families.

Three Waterloo Eagles are at the Invalides: those of the 2nd Grenadiers
of the Guard, and of the 25th and 26th of the Line; these last two
of the regiments in the columns charged by the Scots Greys and the
Royals. In addition to the Eagles, there are at the Invalides several
standards that saw service on the battlefield under Napoleon and
survived the vicissitudes of war: seven flags of infantry, and as
many of artillery, one cuirassier standard, and five other cavalry
standards. Most of these originally bore Eagles on their staves, but
those Eagles are now wanting.[47]

[Illustration]




                               FOOTNOTES


[1] “The Eagle for each standard,” said Napoleon, going into details
with Berthier, “must be made ‘strong and light’--‘_Il convient de la
rendre à la fois solide et légère._’” “An Eagle looking to its left,
with wings half expanded, and with its talons grasping a thunderbolt,
as in the old Roman standard,” was the approved design: the bird
measuring eight inches from head to feet, and in the spread of its
wings from tip to tip, nine and a half inches. Below the thunderbolt,
as base and support, was a tablet of brass, three inches square;
bearing in raised figures the number of the regiment. The weight of the
whole--the Eagle was to be of copper, gilded over--was just three and
a half pounds avoirdupois, and a stout oaken staff was provided, eight
feet long and painted _bleu impérial_, to which the silken regimental
colour was attached; the flag being thirty-five inches along the staff
and thirty-three lengthwise, in the fly.

[2] The drawings made and laid before Napoleon at Saint-Cloud are in
existence, preserved among the archives of the Ministry of War in Paris.

[3] All armies, as a fact, owe to Napoleon the introduction of the
practice of inscribing on the colours of a regiment the names of
battles in which that regiment has won honour; nowadays an essential
feature of the war-flags of all nations. It originated after Napoleon’s
first campaign as General Bonaparte, at the head of the Army of Italy;
and, together with the inscriptions of quotations of passages from his
despatches, was introduced by him as a device to aid in developing
military spirit and a sense of _esprit de corps_ among the soldiers.
The Directory promptly censured the innovating young general for acting
without having first referred the matter to Paris. They sent orders
that all such inscriptions were to be forthwith deleted from the
flags. Napoleon, however, refused to obey; and the regiments of his
Army supported him. One and all protested against the removal of their
titles to fame, the first appearance of which on their flags had been
hailed with enthusiasm. In the result the Directory deemed it advisable
to accept the situation; and after that, in turn, the flags of the
regiments of the other Republican armies elsewhere were authorised to
display similar decorations of their own. The practice in due course
was adopted in the other armies of Europe.

[4] The sending of an invitation to the Pope had been finally decided
on in July, after a series of protracted discussions in the Imperial
Council of State.

[5] One of the Eagles so presented by Napoleon on that afternoon is
now at Madrid. It is a trophy that is absolutely unique. Upwards of
a hundred and thirty of Napoleon’s Eagles, the spoils of war, now
decorate cathedrals, chapels, and arsenals in the capitals of Europe;
but there is only one French naval Eagle now in existence, the trophy
at Madrid; the Eagle of a line-of-battleship named the _Atlas_.

Every French line-of-battleship was represented on the Champ de Mars
and received its Eagle. “Tous les vaisseaux,” to quote the words of
M. Le Brun, in his _Guerres Maritimes de France_, “étaient gratifiés
d’une aigle et d’un drapeau à leur nom, donnés par l’Empereur à son
couronnement, ou avaient assisté et prêté serment des députations du
port et de l’Armée Navale; chaque vaisseau avait envoyé sa députation
composée de trois officiers, trois officiers mariners, et quatre
gabiers ou matelots.”

The Eagle of the _Atlas_ was received on the Field of Mars by the
ship’s deputation of three officers, three warrant officers, and four
seamen, sent from Toulon, where the _Atlas_ then was in harbour with
Admiral Villeneuve’s fleet, which Nelson was watching. The _Atlas_
crossed the Atlantic in the Toulon fleet with Nelson in pursuit,
returned to Europe, fought in the indecisive battle off Cape Finisterre
in July 1805, and was so shattered in the fight, in which the ship only
just escaped capture, that she was left behind for repairs at Ferrol
when Villeneuve put to sea finally, to meet his fate at Trafalgar. The
_Atlas_ had to remain there and fell into the hands of the Spaniards in
1808, at the time of the national uprising against Napoleon. Thus the
naval Eagle passed into Spanish possession.

The crew of the _Atlas_ were taken by surprise, while the ship was in
dock at Ferrol, by the Spanish regiment of Navarre in garrison there
when the news of the Rising of May 2 at Madrid reached Galicia. They
were trapped and pounced down upon. The ship was seized by a sudden
assault, the officers and men being made prisoners to the provincial
Junta, before they had a chance of concealing or making away with their
Eagle.

In other cases elsewhere, undoubtedly, the naval Eagles were somehow
disposed of surreptitiously. It is very remarkable that not a single
French naval Eagle came into British hands on board the thirty odd
ships of the line which we captured between 1805 and 1814 during the
war with Napoleon. At Trafalgar, according to a French officer on
board the French flagship, the _Bucentaure_, they had one. Describing
the approach of the _Victory_, at the outset of the battle, says the
officer: “A collision appeared inevitable. At that moment Villeneuve
seized the Eagle of the _Bucentaure_ and displayed it to the sailors
who surrounded him. ‘My friends,’ he called out, ‘I am going to throw
this on board the English ship! We will go and fetch it back or die!’
(‘Mes amis, je vais la jetter à bord du vaisseau Anglais! Nous irons
la reprendre ou mourir!’) Our seamen responded to these noble words by
their acclamations.” Admiral Villeneuve, all the same, did not throw
any Eagle on board the _Victory_; nor was one found in the _Bucentaure_
during the forty-eight hours that the ship was in our possession after
the battle, previous to her wreck in the storm at the entrance to Cadiz
harbour. None too were found on board any of Nelson’s other prizes.
As to that, also, what was done with, or became of, the Eagles of the
five battalions serving as marines in the French fleet at Trafalgar,
officers and men of which were taken prisoners by us--those of the 2nd
of the Line, the 16th, 67th, 70th, and 79th?

At the Field of Mars all eyes were on the six hundred and fifty
officers and men of the Naval Brigade as they marched round the arena
to receive their Eagles. Soldiers everybody was familiar with. There
was nothing particular about them which had not been seen before. But
a French sailor was not often seen away from his port; and to Paris
man-of-war’s men were things quite new and strange. And, besides, were
they not “nos braves marins,” who were going to clear the way for the
“Invasion Flotilla” and the “Army of England”; to strike the blow that
should sweep from the path of the Emperor “ce terrible Nelson!” One
and all gazed in wonder at the sailors: the captains in their long,
swallow-tailed blue coatees barred with gold lace, white breeches, and
high top-boots; the sprightly “_aspirants_,” or midshipmen, in cut-away
jackets and little round hats with turned-up brims; the showy “Marins
de la Garde,” wearing broad-topped shakos edged with yellow braid,
over which tall red tufts nodded, red-cuffed and yellow-braided blue
jackets, and blue trousers striped with yellow; the other sailors of
the fleet in massed squads, in shiny black flat-brimmed hats, blue
jackets studded with brass buttons, red waistcoats, red, white, and
blue striped pantaloons, wide in the leg, “a l’Anglaise,” and shoes
with round steel buckles. Such a sight the good people of Paris had
never witnessed before, and they gazed at it rapturously with all their
eyes, and shouted their loudest “Vive la Marine!”

There was too, in addition to the sailors, one Eagle deputation
the strange appearance of which attracted special curiosity and
interest that afternoon. Everybody gazed in wonder at a group of
strapping-looking foreigners of all ages who marched along by
themselves, got up as light infantrymen, with green tufted shakos and
bright green uniforms. They belonged to one of the Emperor’s newest
creations; and were the Eagle escort of Napoleon’s “Irish Legion.” They
had come to the Field of Mars to receive the only Eagle that Napoleon
ever gave to a foreign regiment in his service, with a flag designed
specially for them, of “Irish Green,” as it was described, of silk,
fringed with gold cord, inscribed on one side in letters on gold:
“Napoléon, Empereur des Français, à la Legion Irlandaise,” and bearing
on the other a golden harp, uncrowned, and the words “L’Indépendance
d’Irlande.” Two ex-patriated men of good Irish family, refugees escaped
from the penalty of treason under English law for their part in the
Rising of ’98, seven years before, headed the deputation; a Captain
Tennant and a Captain William Corbet. In the ranks of the regiment
the deputation represented marched other Irish refugees, who had shed
English blood at Wexford and Enniscorthy; fugitives from political
justice before that who had had a part in the attempted raids of Hoche
and Humbert; “Wild Geese” who had made their flight overseas after the
fiasco of 1803; and a sprinkling of French-born Irish, some of whom had
worn the red coat of the old Irish Brigade in the Royal Army of France,
grandsons of the men of Fontenoy. Napoleon had enrolled his Irish
Legion just a twelvemonth before, in view of a descent on Ireland from
Brest simultaneously with the crossing of the Straits of Dover from
Boulogne. At the request of those who first came forward to enlist, he
had uniformed the corps in the “national” green, in place of the former
red coat which had been the historic colour of the old French-Irish
regiments ever since James the Second, under the Treaty of Limerick,
carried over to France the remains of the army that had fought for him
at the Boyne. The Eagle the Irish Legion received on the Field of Mars
faced Wellington in Spain, and narrowly escaped falling into Blücher’s
hands in Germany in 1813. It was hidden away after Fontainebleau,
and reappeared during the “Hundred Days,” finally to disappear after
Waterloo.

[6] Pigtails, too, were missing; for the first time at a military
display of the kind in Paris. Even the soldiers of the Revolution,
the rank and file, had kept up the old style of clubbed-hair. The new
_régime_, however, had altered all that. “Le petit tondu” (“The little
shorn one”), a camp-fire nickname for Napoleon, from his close-cropped
head, had made every soldier cut his hair short; by a general order
of six months before. The order, it may be mentioned incidentally, at
first nearly raised a riot in the Imperial Guard, and led to a number
of duels between “les canichons,” the “lap-dogs” or “poodles,” as
the men who obeyed the order at the outset were sneeringly dubbed by
comrades who refused to do so, and the others.

[7] Ney rode up to head the 6th Light Infantry at the outset,
immediately after a chaffing challenge to Murat. The two, who had been
operating together during the previous days, had had some difference
over their methods of attack. Said Murat arrogantly on one occasion,
after Ney had been laboriously trying to get into his brother-marshal’s
head an elaborate scheme of his proposed tactics: “I don’t follow your
plans. It is my way not to make mine till I am facing the enemy!”
Ney, on the morning of Elchingen, got his chance to pay Murat back.
They were together, riding close to Napoleon, with all the staff near
by, and not far from the Danube bank. As the guns began to open, Ney
suddenly turned and laid hold of Murat’s arm. Giving his colleague a
rough shake, before the Emperor and everybody, Ney exclaimed: “Now,
Prince, come on! Come along with me! and make your plans in the face
of the enemy!” The astonished Murat drew himself back, whereupon
Ney spurred up his horse and dashed forward; “galloping off to the
river-bank, he plunged into the water up to his horse’s belly amidst a
shower of cannon-balls and grape, to direct the mending of the bridge.”
That done, he galloped on to head the leading column of attack across
the bridge.

[8] Napoleon himself, it so chanced at the outset, heard the fierce
cannonading from afar, and, becoming suddenly alarmed at what might be
happening, was thrown into a fever of anxiety over it; into a state of
violent agitation. It was on the evening of November 11. Napoleon just
then was on his way to take up his quarters at the Abbey of St. Polten,
whence only a few miles intervened between him and Vienna. As he was
nearing St. Polten he was suddenly alarmed by “the smothered, distant
echo of heavy firing, which was not even interrupted by night.” So one
of the aides de camp on the Emperor’s staff, De Ségur, describes. “What
unforeseen danger could suddenly have overtaken Mortier? It was almost
certainly he who, going forward with an advanced guard of five thousand
men, had unexpectedly come across Kutusoff with forty thousand. It was
impossible, though, at first, to imagine the destruction of the marshal
and his unhappy division.”

At St. Polten they listened, and in the end feared for the worst.

“One could only offer up prayers and await the decision of fate! The
wide and deep Danube separated us from the marshal. This stream had
just delivered over to the enemy one of Mortier’s generals, who in
despair had tried to make his escape in a boat. Everything announced a
catastrophe: the Emperor no longer doubted it. In his anxiety, as he
drew nearer to the sound of the combat, while advancing from Moelkt
to St. Polten, the fear of a reverse usurped the place of Napoleon’s
former confidence of victory. Now, his agitation increasing with the
noise of the firing, he despatched everybody for news: officers, aides
de camp; every officer who happened to be near him. With his mind
full of Mortier’s peril he suspended the progress of the invasion.
He stopped Bernadotte and the flotilla behind at Moelkt. He recalled
Murat, dashing on for the gates of Vienna; and Soult, following Murat.
Not indeed until three on the next afternoon, the 12th of November,
was Napoleon’s anxiety allayed by the arrival of an aide de camp from
Mortier.”

[9] It was to one of these retreating columns that the historic “Ice
Disaster” happened. Every one knows the story, as related in Napoleon’s
Austerlitz Bulletin, and mentioned also by Ségur, Marbot, and Lejeune
in their memoirs, how a column from the Russian left wing tried to
escape over the frozen surface of the lake of Satschan, how Napoleon
turned a battery on them while in the act of crossing the ice and
broke it, and how “thousands of Russians, with their horses, guns,
and waggons, were seen slowly settling down into the depths.” The
actual facts are recorded in the recently discovered report of the
“Fischmeister” (or overseer) of the Carp Fishery of Satschan Lake,
setting forth the results of draining off the water in the spring
of 1806. There were found at the bottom, recorded the Fischmeister,
twenty-eight cannon, one hundred and fifty dead horses, but only three
human corpses. The column, it would appear, had been composed of five
batteries of artillery, and when the ice was broken, the guns, all but
the two nearest the shore, sank through and dragged the horses with
them to the bottom; but the gunners, it would seem, were all able to
scramble out, except the three unfortunates who had been either hit by
French round-shot, or were entangled in the harness of their teams. The
loss of human life was therefore, presumably, only three men out of the
five hundred or so who must have been riding on, or with, the guns.

[10] Incidentally, that Christmas Day morning of the Schönbrunn review
has an interest for us in this country. Napoleon left the palace for
the review in a vile temper, which no doubt was one reason why he
vented his spleen so savagely on the unfortunate soldiers of the 4th
in his speech of censure. This was probably the prime cause. Late on
the night before, on Christmas Eve, a courier from Paris had arrived at
the Imperial head-quarters, bringing the defeated Admiral Villeneuve’s
Trafalgar despatch, his “Compte Rendu,” written while Villeneuve was a
prisoner on his way to England, and dated from “A bord de la frégate
Anglaise _Euryalus_--le 15me Novembre 1805.” It had been sent to France
under a flag of truce, as an act of international courtesy, and the
Minister of Marine forwarded it to Napoleon. The news of the disaster
had reached the Emperor some five weeks before, at Znaim in Moravia, a
fortnight before Austerlitz; first, from some Austrian officers taken
prisoners by Augereau in the Tyrol, then from the English papers. It
had been enough then to give him a bad night, and make him morose for a
week. Now that he learned the story from his own admiral, it made him
more furious than ever. The original despatch received by Napoleon at
Schönbrunn that Christmas Eve exists, with its pathetic closing appeal,
the pitiless response to which sent Admiral Villeneuve to a suicide’s
grave. “Profondément pénétré,” it ran, as written by Villeneuve’s own
hand, “de toute l’etendue de mon malheur et de toute la responsibilité
que comporte un aussi grand désastre, je ne désire rien tant que d’être
bientôt à même d’aller mettre aux pieds de S.M. ou la justification
de ma conduite ou la victime qui doit être immolée, non a l’honneur
du pavillon, qui, j’ose le dire, est demeuré intact, mais aux manes
de ceaux qui auroient péri par mon imprudence, mon inconsidération ou
l’oubli de quelqu’un de mes devoirs.”

[11] The spectacles which Marshal Davout wore at Auerstadt--an
extremely primitive-looking pair of goggles in thick-rimmed
frames--were picked up on the field, and are treasured to this day by
the family of the present Duc d’Auerstadt.

[12] Gudin’s division was officially returned as having lost 124
officers and 3,500 men.

[13] Davout’s cocked hat, with one end shot away and a bullet-hole
through the crown, is now one of the battle relics of Napoleon’s wars
kept at the Invalides.

[14] In his instructions to Ney in regard to the trophies taken,
Napoleon wrote this, specially with reference to a number of flags
belonging to Prussian regiments elsewhere which had been temporarily
stored at Magdeburg: “Les drapeaux prussiens pris dans l’arsenal de
Magdeburg ne signifient rien: donnez l’ordre qu’ils soient brûlés, mais
vous ferez porter en triomphe par votre premier division les drapeaux
pris à la garnison, pour être remis par vous à Berlin à l’Empereur. On
ne doit porter en triomphe que les drapeaux pris les armes à la main,
et brûler ceux pris dans les arsenaux.”

[15] The _Moniteur_ made this notification in addition: “The Emperor
has ordered a series of eight pictures, sixteen feet by ten, each,
with life-size figures, from MM. Gérard, Lethière, Gautherot, Guérin,
Hennequin, Girodet, Meynier, and Gros. The pictures are intended for
the galleries of the Tuileries, and will depict the most memorable
events of the campaign in Germany.” They are now in the Louvre, badly
“skied,” and only paid heed to by the batches of recruits who from
time to time are conducted round to see them under the guidance of
under-officer instructors as lecturers.

[16] The hat that Napoleon wore at Eylau is kept in the little crypt
beside Napoleon’s tomb in the Invalides. It is the identical one
represented in the colossal picture of the battle by Gros, to be seen
at the Louvre, and was given to Gros for the picture. At the second
Funeral of Napoleon in 1840, it figured beside the coffin, with the
Emperor’s decorations and the sword Napoleon wore at Austerlitz.

[17] A gallant young officer of the Guard was the first man to break
through the Russian line in front. With half a dozen grenadiers he made
a dash forward, just as the chasseurs made their attack. Captain Ernest
Auzoni--that was the young officer’s name--caught sight of a Russian
flag a few paces from him, and, calling on the men of his company, led
straight at it, cutting his way through. “Courage!” he shouted. “Brave
comrades! Follow me!” Auzoni, describes Caulaincourt, “rushed forward
sword in hand, followed by his company, and penetrated the compact
centre of the Russian column: his sudden assault broke their ranks, and
our grenadiers burst in through the passage opened to them by the brave
Auzoni.”

Napoleon, from his post near at hand, was also an eye-witness of the
captain’s daring. On the Russians falling back after the routing of the
column, as the Guard were re-forming for a fresh advance, he summoned
Auzoni and the men of his company before him. “Captain Auzoni,” began
Napoleon as they stood in front of him, “you well deserve the honour
of commanding my ‘veteran’ _vieux moustaches_; you have most nobly
distinguished yourself. You have won an officer’s cross and an annuity
of two thousand francs. You were made captain at the beginning of the
campaign, and I hope you will return to Paris with still higher rank.
A man who earns his honours on the field of battle stands very high in
my estimation!” Turning then to the soldiers, Napoleon added: “I award
ten crosses to your company!” With an enthusiastic cheer the company
marched off to rejoin their comrades, and as Caulaincourt puts it, “the
same men advanced to meet the enemy’s fire with a degree of courage and
enthusiasm which is impossible to describe.”

The brave young Guardsman captain, though, did not see Paris again.
Auzoni met his fate at Eylau. He fell later in the day, in another
charge, in which he took a second Russian flag. Napoleon himself
discovered him, lying at the last gasp among the mortally wounded
on the field. It was next day, as Napoleon, in accordance with his
invariable practice, was riding over the scene of the battle.

“Near a battery which had been abandoned by the enemy,” to use again
the words of Caulaincourt, “about 150 or 200 French grenadiers were
lying dead, surrounded by four times their number of Russians. They
were lying weltering in a river of blood, amid broken gun-carriages,
muskets, swords, and other _débris_. They had plainly fought with the
most determined fury, for every corpse showed numerous and horrible
wounds. A feeble cry of ‘Vive l’Empereur!’ was heard as we rode up.
It came from the middle of this mountain of dead, and all eyes were
turned instantly to the spot whence the voice proceeded. Half concealed
beneath a tattered flag lay a young officer whose breast was decorated
with an order. He was still alive, and, though covered with many
wounds, as we stopped by him he managed to raise himself so as to rest
on his elbow. But his handsome face was overcast with the livid hue of
death. He recognised the Emperor, and, in a feeble, faltering voice,
exclaimed: ‘God bless your Majesty! Farewell, farewell! Oh, my poor
mother!’ He turned a look of supplication towards the Emperor, and with
that, with the words on his lips, ‘To my country, to dear France--my
last thoughts!’ he fell back dead.

“Napoleon seemed riveted to the spot. ‘Brave men!’ he exclaimed. ‘Brave
Auzoni! Noble young fellow! Ah, this is a frightful scene! The annuity
shall go to his mother: let the order be presented for my signature
as soon as possible!’ Then, turning to Surgeon Ivan, who accompanied
him, he said: ‘Examine poor Auzoni’s wounds and see what can be done
for him!’ Nothing however, could be done: the brave youth was beyond
medical aid.”

[18] The Old Guard was recruited from the _élite_ of the Line. After
every battle soldiers who had been particularly prominent in the
fighting were specially transferred to the Old Guard; a form of
advancement much coveted among the rank and file. At all times there
was great competition to enter the Guard, and every regimental colonel
kept “waiting lists,” in anticipation of vacancies, on which names
were sometimes down for years. Service in the Old Guard meant, in
addition to the prestige of enrolment in so favoured a corps, life amid
the gaieties and pleasures of Paris, with increased pay and personal
privileges; and the highly estimated honour of a special weekly
inspection by the Emperor himself in the Courtyard of the Carrousel, at
which Napoleon invariably walked in and out among the ranks, talking to
the men; and any Guardsman who had a grievance might then personally
lay it before the Emperor. The private in the Guard drew seven sous a
day as compared with the one sou pay of the private of the Line. Off
duty, the private of the Guard ranked on an equality with a sergeant of
the Line, and in army social circles was entitled to be addressed by
the Linesmen he met as “Monsieur.”

Only men of unblemished record were qualified for admission to the
Old Guard. A colonel of a Line regiment on one occasion sent a man
into the Guard who turned out a _mauvais sujet_. Napoleon ordered the
unfortunate colonel to be publicly reprimanded on parade, and confined
to his quarters for three days; and further had his name and offence
put in General Army Orders, issued for universal circulation from
the War Office, and posted up at the head-quarters of every regiment
throughout the service.

[19] Baron Lejeune, on the Imperial staff at Wagram, who was clever
with his pencil, was specially desired by Napoleon to design the
costume for the Eagle-Guard, as he himself relates. “Anxious to confer
distinction on those brave fellows who had taken part in the actual
defence of the flag, the Eagle of their regiment, Napoleon conceived
the idea of giving them a costume and equipment which should mark
them out as specially honoured, and at the same time be suitable to
the duties they had to perform. The Emperor therefore sent for me and
asked me to make a sketch of a costume such as he wished to give to
what he called his ‘Eagle-Guard,’ or those non-commissioned officers
whose office it was to surround and defend the actual standard-bearers.
The chief weapons of each were to be a pistol, a sword, and a lance,
so that in the heat of the battle they would never have to trouble
themselves about loading a gun. There was to be gold on their
epaulettes, sword-belts, and helmets. I made a drawing and took it
to the Emperor, and he sent it to the Minister of War with his own
instructions on the subject.”

[20] Colonel Lejeune was again called in to design the decoration for
the Order, and has recorded what Napoleon said to him. “‘The Order of
the Golden Fleece,’ he said, ‘is typical of victory; my Eagles have
triumphed over the Golden Fleeces of the King of Spain and the Emperors
of Germany, so I mean to create for the French Empire an Imperial Order
of the Three Golden Fleeces. The sign of this order shall be my own
Eagle with outspread wings, holding in each of its talons one of the
ancient Golden Fleeces it has carried off; whilst hanging from its
beak it will proudly display the Fleece I now institute.’ He then took
a pen and roughly marked out the size I was to make my drawing.... I
made the drawings as desired, and he issued the order accordingly. The
institution of the new Order was duly announced in the _Moniteur_;
but the terms of the treaty of peace compelled him to suppress a
distinction the chief aim of which had been to humiliate the conquered
countries of Spain and Austria.”

[21] They were to be merely identifying tokens. “If by misfortune,”
Napoleon went so far as to say, “fanions should fall into the enemy’s
hands, it will be apparent from their plain appearance that their
capture is a matter of no account.” “Une affaire sans conséquence” were
Napoleon’s words.

[22] It was during the battle at Ratisbon that Napoleon, according
to the story, was wounded for the only time in his life, and had to
dismount, and, in the sight of the dismayed soldiers, have his wound
dressed by a surgeon, the news causing consternation through the ranks
of the whole army far and wide. Indeed, only this year there was
placed in the Army Museum at the Invalides, as an historic relic of
the highest interest, “the fragment of a shell that struck Napoleon at
Ratisbon on the 23rd of April, 1809, and gave him the only wound he
ever received in battle.” The truth is revealed in M. Combes’ journal,
which, after telling how Napoleon carefully concealed everything
which might detract from his reputation among his soldiers for
invulnerability, enumerates his wounds in detail. After his death half
a dozen scars were found on his body. There was the mark of a wound on
his head, a hole above his left knee, either from a bayonet or a lance,
the mark of the injury received at Ratisbon, another on one hand, and
on the body the scars of sword cuts and slashes.

[23] As to this last trophy, it was unfortunate from our point of
view--since Fate willed that the 5th of the Line should lose its
colours to an enemy--that one of the original Battalion Eagles of the
corps had previously, in accordance with Napoleon’s order of 1808, been
returned to Paris. The half-winged Eagle of the 5th would have made
a notable trophy for Chelsea Hospital. While heading an attack on an
Austrian field-work in Masséna’s battle at Caldiero on the Venetian
frontier in November 1805, the Eagle was smashed from its staff by a
grape-shot and dashed violently to the ground, with one wing shattered.
At the same time the battalion recoiled before the terrific fire with
which its charge was met. The Eagle saved the honour of the corps.
Picking its battered remains up and waving it at arm’s-length above his
head, with a shout of “Come on, comrades! follow the Eagle,” one of
the officers rushed with it through the _mêlée_ to the front and led
the forlorn-hope onset that stormed the post. After that, the Eagle,
lashed to the stump of its broken pole, went through the battle to the
end, doing its part in rallying the battalion round it, to keep at
bay greatly superior numbers of the enemy until relief arrived. There
had been almost a mutiny in the 5th in 1808 when they were ordered to
return their battle-scarred ensign to the Invalides, but the order was
obeyed. Otherwise the half-winged Eagle would have been at Chelsea now.

[24] The present imitation Eagle at Chelsea was specially cast in brass
from a mould of one of other trophies; one of the Eagles of the 82nd
being used as the model. The imitation wreath was made from a sketch
by an old officer of the Hospital staff. The Eagle and wreath were
specially reproduced in order that the Barrosa Eagle trophy should be
represented among the Peninsular and Waterloo Eagles displayed together
at the head of the catafalque on the occasion of the lying-in-state at
Chelsea of the remains of the Duke of Wellington, seven months after
the theft. The dummy is in the Chapel at Chelsea now, with a brass
tablet beneath it notifying that it is not the original Eagle, set
up where the Barrosa Eagle used to be, in front of the organ-loft.
The existing staff, however, is genuine. It is the Eagle-pole that
the thief threw away in his fright; the staff actually borne by the
Porte-Aigle of Napoleon’s 8th of the Line under fire at Austerlitz and
Friedland; the identical staff inclined in salute with the Eagle to
Napoleon on the throne on the Day of the Eagles on the Field of Mars.

[25] In a letter from an officer of the 87th, published in the London
papers, it is stated that the regiment also captured the Eagle of the
French 47th, but “the man who had charge of it was obliged to throw it
away, from excessive fatigue and a wound. We had been under arms for
thirty-two hours before the action began.”

[26] The successor to the 8th of the Line of the Grand Army in the
Army of the Third Napoleon was, in its turn, no less unfortunate than
its predecessor. The Eagle of the 8th of the Line of the Army of the
Second Empire is now at Potsdam, one of the spoils of the war of
1870–1. It was carried through the streets of Berlin in the triumphal
parade of the Prussian troops on their return home after the war, and
after that, was deposited over the vault of Frederick the Great in the
Church at Potsdam in the presence of the old Kaiser Wilhelm, Moltke,
Von Roon, and other leaders of the victorious host. It bears these
“battle-honours,” inscribed on its silken flag, among them “Talavera”:

                              “AUSTERLITZ
                                 1805.
                               FRIEDLAND
                                 1807.
                                TALAVERA
                                 1809.
                                 ANVERS
                                 1832.
                                ZAATCHA
                                 1849.
                               SOLFERINO
                                 1859.”


[27] Southey, in his _History of the Peninsular War_, makes this ugly
suggestion in regard to the Eagle trophies of Salamanca: “It is said
that more than _ten_ were captured, but that there were men base enough
to conceal them and sell them to persons in Salamanca who deemed it
good policy, as well as a profitable speculation, to purchase them
for the French.” It may be, as to that, that Marmont’s army lost more
than the two Eagles now at Chelsea. It is of course possible that
camp followers and Spanish peasants of the locality, wandering over
the battlefield to strip and plunder the dead on the day after the
battle, when Wellington and the army were miles away, picked up Eagles
on the scene of so tremendous a disaster for the French. They might
easily traffic in them with French agents at Salamanca, well aware of
their value if they could be secretly restored to their regiments. It
is, however, inconceivable that British soldiers could have acted as
alleged and been guilty of the dastardly crime that Southey hints at.
Four Eagle-poles, with screw tops and the Eagles gone, were found on
the field by British burying-parties; but those were all, and one of
the four may have been the pole of the Eagle of the 62nd.

[28] As to Napoleon’s opinion in regard to the preservation of trophies
so acquired, see his memo to Ney at Magdeburg, quoted in Chapter V., as
footnote to page 141.

[29] Napoleon had given permission to his marshals in Spain to grant
colonels of regiments, in certain circumstances, discretionary
powers as to the disposal of their Eagles. Colonels were authorised,
when their regiments were proceeding on what might be considered
“exceptionally hazardous service,” or when operating in difficult
country, to keep the Eagles back, and leave them in camp or in a
fortress. That is how Wellington in 1812 came to find the Eagles of the
13th and 51st of the Line at Madrid.

[30] On July 28, 1813, in a skirmish in the Pyrenees, the 40th (now the
2nd Somersetshire Regiment) surrounded and captured the French 32nd of
the Line, rounding its First Battalion up in a valley and charging it
with the bayonet, 24 officers and 700 men being taken. The Eagle had
been thrown into a rapid mountain torrent in sight of our men, during
the retreat of the 32nd, but it was impossible to prevent it, or to
recover the Eagle afterwards.

[31] Others of the Eagles had narrow escapes during the Peninsular
War. In the fighting south of the Douro, near Grijon, on the day
before Wellington’s passage of the river at Oporto, the 31st Light
Infantry all but lost their Eagle on being charged by the British
14th and 20th Light Dragoons. The 31st broke in confusion before the
British onset, and only rallied some miles from the battlefield. “Our
losses,” described one of the officers, “were very heavy, but our
Eagle, which had been in extreme peril in the encounter, was happily
saved.” Again, in the pursuit up the mountain side after the defeat of
Girard’s Division at Arroyo dos Molinos, the Eagles of the 34th and
40th of the Line escaped capture--although both regiments were all but
annihilated--to Marshal Soult’s expressed relief. In reporting the
reverse to Napoleon, Soult added this by way of solatium: “L’honneur
des armes est sauvé; les Aigles ne sont pas tombés au pouvoir de
l’ennemi.” After Talavera, the Eagle of the 25th of the Line was picked
up on the battlefield by a party of the King’s German Legion--it was
sent to Hanover and is now in Berlin; also, during the battle, the
British 29th took two Eagle-poles in a charge, but with the Eagles
unscrewed from the tops and removed by the Eagle-bearers at the last
moment and carried out of the fight under their coats.

[32] Elsewhere are other permanent trophies of the campaign, spoils
of another kind. Nine hundred and twenty-nine of Napoleon’s cannon
fell into Russian hands, mostly abandoned during the retreat, without
attempt at defence. Of these, most are fittingly kept at Moscow; they
number 875, and are exhibited in the arsenal, or mounted as trophies in
the public squares in the Holy City. As with the flags, they are not
all French. Those bearing the French Imperial cypher, the letter “N”
surmounted by the Eagle and Napoleonic crown, number less than a half
of the total. The French guns number 365; the bulk of the collection
being made up of artillery from allied and vassal states: 189 Austrian
cannon, 123 Prussian, 70 Italian, 40 Neapolitan, 34 Bavarian, 22 Dutch,
12 Saxon, 8 Spanish, 5 Polish, with 7 Westphalian, Würtemburg, and
Hanoverian pieces. The Prussian and Austrian guns, most of them, it is
fair to say, were not captured from the contingents serving with the
Grand Army in Russia: they formed part of the artillery marching with
Napoleon’s main column; they belonged to the French army, and were
manned by French gunners, being spoils from the Austerlitz, Wagram,
and Jena campaigns, turned to account to form field batteries for the
French army. Innumerable other reminders of the fate of the Grand
Army are preserved all over Russia: soldiers’ arms and accoutrements,
personal belongings and decorations of French officers and men,
fragments of uniforms, helmets, swords and lances, pistols and muskets;
relics mostly picked up on battlefields or by the wayside along the
route of the retreat. The muskets serve to illustrate incidentally,
in the variety of the woods used for their stocks, the makeshifts to
which, some time before 1812, the demands of Napoleon’s armaments had
reduced France: the musket-stocks of oak, chestnut, elm, beech, maple,
of even poplar and deal, tell a tale of exhausted supplies of the
walnut and ash woods ordinarily used in the manufacture of firearms.

The total of 75 Eagles and other standards is no extravagantly
large array of trophies, remembering the overwhelming nature of the
catastrophe to the Grand Army in Russia. Of the 600,000 soldiers
who mustered round their regimental colours at the crossing of the
Niemen at the outset of the campaign, 125,000 were killed in fight,
and 193,048, according to the Russian official returns, were taken
prisoners. In round numbers 250,000 died on the line of march during
the retreat, from cold, hardships, and starvation, or were killed as
stragglers by the Cossacks and peasants. The mementoes also of their
grim fate exist to-day in Russia. The graves of most of them may be
seen all along the railway line from Wilna to Moscow, which follows
closely the route of Napoleon and the Grand Army, over country the same
in appearance now as then; a dreary, wind-swept, lonesome plain, broken
only by vast stretches of dark, monotonous birch and pine forests, with
here and there narrow ravines, and strips of hilly ground, amid which
wind chill and sluggish rivers. At intervals huge mounds, looking like
embankments or ancient barrows of enormous size, rise over the flat
expanse of plain. They are the graves of the French dead. It took three
months to destroy the remains of the dead soldiers and of some 150,000
horses which perished in the campaign. The ghastly task was carried out
locally by the peasantry, under an urgent Government order, so as to
prevent the outbreak of pestilence in the spring from the vast numbers
of unburied corpses that strewed the track of the ill-fated host. The
bodies, when the snow thawed, were dragged together and collected in
heaps each “half a verst long and two fathoms high,” over 500 yards
long and some 14 feet high. At first, efforts were made to burn them,
but the supply of firewood failed, and the stench all over the country
was unbearable. The corpses were then hauled into shallow trenches
alongside, and quicklime and earth heaped over them, making the mounds
now to be seen along the railway, on either side of the old post-road
from Wilna to Moscow, the route of Napoleon’s retreat. In the province
of Moscow, 50,000 dead soldiers and 29,000 dead horses were so disposed
of before the middle of February; in the province of Smolensk, by
the end of the month, 72,000 dead soldiers and 52,000 horses; in the
province of Minsk, 40,000 human corpses and 28,000 horses; to which,
later on, when the ice had melted, 12,000 more dead soldiers were
added, the bodies found in the Beresina; in the province of Wilna, also
by the end of February, 73,000 dead soldiers, with 10,000 dead horses.
There were, in addition, very many never accounted for: dead stragglers
who had perished in the forests, their remains being devoured by the
wolves; and those who were massacred--beaten to death, or buried alive,
or burned alive--by the peasants in places away from the line of march.
Such was the appalling loss of life that attended the Moscow campaign,
and which the trophies represent. In the circumstances, in proportion,
the toll is hardly a large one.

[33] The wolves killed many of the stragglers as they wandered in
search of food or shelter from the cold, away from the retreating
columns. They followed in the track of the Grand Army to the last,
across Germany to the Rhine. It is the fact, indeed, that the presence
of wolves to-day in the forest lands of Central Europe is largely due
to the tremendous incursion of ravenous brutes from Russia which swept
in huge swarms in rear of Napoleon’s ill-fated host.

[34] Coignet, then a lieutenant of the Old Guard, thus speaks of the
horrors of those latter days immediately following the Beresina: “The
cold continued to grow more intense; the horses in the bivouacs died
of hunger and cold. Every day some were left where we had passed the
night. The roads were like glass. The horses fell down, and could not
get up. Our worn-out soldiers no longer had strength to carry their
arms. The barrels of their guns were so cold that they stuck to their
hands. It was twenty-eight degrees below zero. But the Guard gave up
their knapsacks and guns only with their lives. In order to save our
lives, we had to eat the horses that fell upon the ice. The soldiers
opened the skin with their knives, and took out the entrails, which
they roasted on the coals, if they had time to make a fire; and, if
not, they ate them raw. They devoured the horses before they died. I
also ate this food as long as the horses lasted. As far as Wilna we
travelled by short stages with the Emperor. His whole staff marched
along the sides of the road. The men of the demoralised army marched
along like prisoners, without arms and without knapsacks. There was no
longer any discipline or any human feeling for one another. Each man
looked out for himself. Every sentiment of humanity was extinguished.
No one would have reached out his hand to his father; and that can
easily be understood. For he who stooped down to help his fellow would
not be able to rise again. We had to march right on, making faces to
prevent our noses and ears from freezing. The men became insensible to
every human feeling. No one even murmured against our misfortunes. The
men fell, frozen stiff, all along the road. If, by chance, any of them
came upon a bivouac of other unfortunate creatures who were thawing
themselves, the newcomers pitilessly pushed them aside, and took
possession of their fire. The poor creatures would then lie down to die
upon the snow. One must have seen these horrors in order to believe
them.... But it was at Wilna that we suffered most. The weather was so
severe that the men could no longer endure it: even the ravens froze.”

[35] One of those who presented arms before Napoleon at the Rheims
review died, just twenty years ago, as the last French survivor of
Trafalgar--André Manuel Cartigny. At Trafalgar he had been a powder-boy
on board the celebrated _Redoutable_, from the mizen-top of which the
bullet was fired which killed Nelson. He paraded at Rheims among the
remnant of survivors of Napoleon’s last battalion left of the Seamen of
the Guard, and was present a month later at the historic farewell at
Fontainebleau.

[36] General Dupont, an officer of the highest promise and with an
exceptionally brilliant record, Ney’s right-hand man, and chief
divisional leader on many battlefields, a special favourite also with
Napoleon (“a man I loved and was rearing up to be a marshal,” were
Napoleon’s words of him), while on the expedition which was to win him
the bâton, at the head of 25,000 men, let himself be surrounded and
cut off; trapped among the gorges of the Sierra Morena by a horde of
peasants backed up by Spanish regulars; and then, in spite of a final
chance that offered for him to force his way through, surrendered to
the enemy. He had committed “_une chose sans exculpe; une lacheté
insultante_,” declared Napoleon in savage fury on hearing of the
surrender. Those who had had part in it, declared the Emperor, should
“die on the scaffold”--“ils porteront sur l’échaffaud la peine de
ce grand crime national!” He had Brigadier Legendre, Dupont’s Chief
of the Staff, who had been released on parole, brought before him
at Valladolid, and heaped on the wretched, broken man the bitterest
reproaches and revilings; beside himself in his wrath. Not a word in
reply, in explanation, would he listen to. Before the Imperial Guard on
parade, and the assembled Imperial Staff, Napoleon finally gripped the
general by the wrist and shook it passionately. An onlooker, another
officer, describes the scene: “A nervous contraction of the muscles
seemed to seize the Emperor. ‘What, General!’ he ejaculated, his voice
quivering with fury. ‘Why did not your hand wither when it signed that
infamous capitulation!’” Legendre was cashiered: Dupont (who had been
ill and was wounded during the battle) was cashiered, degraded from the
Legion of Honour, and kept under police _surveillance_ as long as the
Empire lasted.

What became of the other two Eagles, those of the “Garde de Paris” and
of the Second Battalion of the 5th Light Infantry, and the fourteen
Reserve Battalion flags that were taken at Bailen is unknown. They
are not in Spain, although one trophy indirectly associated with the
disaster is now at Madrid, the admiral’s flag of Admiral Rosily, who
was at Cadiz with the French squadron which Dupont was marching to
rescue. It is kept as a trophy in the Museo Naval of Madrid. Rosily had
charge of the five French ships of the line which escaped into Cadiz
after Trafalgar. When Spain rose against Napoleon, they were placed in
danger from the garrison of Cadiz; being at the same time unable to put
to sea because a British fleet blockaded the port. Dupont’s army was
specially sent to bring away the 4,000 soldiers and sailors on board,
who were then to abandon the ships. Just before Dupont reached Bailen,
the Spaniards attacked Rosily, bombarding his ships with heavy cannon,
and mortars and a gunboat flotilla, and he had to surrender, his
admiral’s flag being carried off by the Spaniards, ultimately to find
its way to its present resting-place.

[37] Years later these trophies were again brought to light, and by
degrees, one at a time, or two or three together, found their way once
more to the Hôtel, where they form part of the present collection.
Among those now in the Invalides are six of Frederick the Great’s
trophies annexed at Berlin by Napoleon in 1806; six Austrian and
Bavarian flags, also of the Seven Years’ War period, removed by
Napoleon from Vienna; an old German flag taken by Marshal Turenne, and
in earlier times hung in Notre Dame; five Austrian colours of unknown
origin; one Russian flag-trophy from Austerlitz; one Prussian standard
from Jena; and a number of Spanish and Portuguese flags from the
Peninsular War.

Three British regimental flags, originally captured by Napoleon’s
Polish lancers at Albuera, found their way back in this manner to
the Invalides. They were taken at Albuera in the first part of the
battle, when, under cover of mist and rain squalls, the French cavalry,
circling round one flank, swooped down on the leading British brigade
before its regiments could form in square. Of the five other British
flags at present in the Invalides, four were taken on March 8, 1814,
just three weeks before the burning of the trophies, and had not yet
reached Paris. They were taken from us in very tragic circumstances--at
the disastrous attempt to storm the fortress of Bergen-op-Zoom; but the
details of that painful story nor the identification of the flags do
not concern us here. One of the four flags is kept beside Napoleon’s
tomb. The fifth flag purports to have been a British sloop-of-war’s red
ensign and to have been captured in the Baltic in December 1813, in an
action of which the British Admiralty has no record, and the French
account is only a tradition. It again, apparently, had not reached
Paris by March 1814.

[38] To the Army, Louis XVIII. was only a King imposed on them by their
enemies; by the triumphant enemies of France, the European Coalition.
He was merely the “_protégé_ of foreign bayonets,” placed over them
by the English and Prussians; “l’émigré rentré en croupe derrière un
cosaque!” To the soldiers he only personified defeat and disaster; and
the memories that they gloried in had been of set purpose obliterated
by him and his creatures. The very charter under which he had assumed
authority was dated the 19th year of his reign, as though Napoleon had
never been. He had proscribed their Eagle standards before which all
Europe had trembled. By his ordinances he had abolished and insulted
the memory of their victories. In addition he had disbanded and turned
adrift their officers, and had left them to starve, without the pay
that was their due, in wretchedness and rags.

Fuel was added to the fires of disaffection in the ranks by the tales
that went round of every barrack-room of personal ill-usage of and
affronts to officers who had won the respect of all on campaign, and
before the enemy under fire. _Ci-devant_ colonels and captains in
long-forgotten corps of the old-time Royal Army were appointed at one
stride Lieutenant-Generals and Major-Generals on the Active List,
ousting and sending into unemployment men, whom Napoleon himself had
picked out for command, whose names were household words to the Army.
In almost every regiment officers who had grown grey in war-service
before the enemy, who had won distinction on a hundred battlefields,
were shelved; set aside for _émigrés_, who, a quarter of a century
before, had been boy subalterns in the army of the _ancien régime_, and
had not set foot in France since they fled the country at the outbreak
of the Revolution. These were brought back and posted wholesale as
colonels and _chefs de bataillon_ all through the Army, superseding
and driving into poverty veterans who had raised themselves to their
ranks and positions through personal merit and war-service, and had
qualified step by step in the different grades. At a _levée_ one day,
after a review before the Duc de Berri, a grey-headed old regimental
officer stepped forward, according to custom, and made a request to
have granted to him for his services the Cross of St. Louis. “What have
you done to deserve it?” was the Prince’s reply, uttered in a cold and
sneering tone. “I have served in the Army of France for twenty years,
your Royal Highness!” “Twenty years of robbery!” was the cruel and
insolent answer as the Duc de Berri turned his back on the veteran. The
words were repeated everywhere among the soldiers and had the worst
effect. Another tale that caused deep resentment throughout the Army
was that of the treatment which Marshal Ney had received at Court when
protesting against rudeness which had been shown by certain ladies of
title to his wife one day at the Tuileries. They had openly insulted
the Maréchale Ney by making sarcastic and contemptuous comments on her
comparatively lowly birth. Marshal Ney personally complained to the
King, but was coldly referred to the Court Chamberlain. He laid his
complaint before that functionary and was personally rebuffed “in a
harsh and insolent manner”--as the only reply to which the Marshal with
his wife had withdrawn from Paris altogether. And more than one other
officer of eminence, it was told, had in like manner been forced to
cease attendance at Court. When the moment came for the reappearance of
Napoleon in their midst, the Army was more than ready to receive their
old leader with open arms and rally once more to the Eagles.

[39] It was the action of Marshal Ney that sealed the fate of the
Bourbon _régime_.

Ney had accepted the Restoration as bringing peace to exhausted France;
he had given in his allegiance to the Bourbons. Angry and sick at heart
as he was over the ill-treatment meted out to his brother officers,
and the humiliations that the new _régime_ had inflicted on the Army,
and sore over personal grievances of his own, he had, in spite of
all, loyally held back from intriguing against the restored dynasty.
Napoleon’s leaving Elba, when he first heard the news, he condemned
outspokenly as a crime against France. Impulsive and headstrong by
nature, he forgot his grievances, and hastened to Paris to offer his
sword to the King. Napoleon, he said to the King at the interview at
the Tuileries, which was immediately granted him, was a madman and
deserved to be brought to Paris “like a bandit in an iron cage.” So
hostile witnesses at Ney’s court-martial declared, though Ney himself
emphatically denied using any words of the kind. His services were
accepted gladly, for Ney was the most popular of all the marshals
with the soldiers, and he was sent to lead the army against Napoleon.
Besançon was proposed as his head-quarters, and he betook himself there.

Almost at once, however, anxieties and doubts beset Ney. On taking
up his command he found but few regiments available. He was promised
reinforcements, but none arrived, and while he waited, no news of the
rapidly altering situation reached him from Paris. Meanwhile the news
came steadily in from all sides that the soldiers could not be trusted
to oppose Napoleon. Ney was still loyal to the Bourbons, and he moved
his troops nearer the line of advance Napoleon was taking; to Lons le
Saulnier, midway between Besançon and Lyons. To officers who hinted
that the soldiers would not fight if Napoleon appeared, Ney answered
angrily: “They _shall_ fight. I will take a musket and begin the firing
myself! I will run my sword through the first man who hesitates!”

But events were moving too fast: the tide of Bonapartism was rising
visibly on all sides. Napoleon, Ney heard, was being received
everywhere with acclamation; the soldiers were said to be declaring
for him by thousands. Already in every garrison the soldiers were
displaying their old Eagle cap-badges and tricolor cockades. “Every
soldier in the Army,” relates Savary in his Memoirs, “had preserved
his tricolor cockade and the Eagle-badge of his shako or cap. It
was needless for any order to be given for their resumption; that
had been done on the first intelligence of the Emperor’s landing in
France.” Everywhere too, officers who had kept back and hidden the
old regimental Eagles and tricolor standards, were bringing them out
openly. In regiments where the Ministerial order had been obeyed and
the Eagles sent to Paris for destruction, the soldiers now took out the
Bourbon arms from the white flags, substituting a tricolor shield for
the royal shield with the three fleurs-de-lis.

Ney next began to doubt what line of conduct he ought to adopt. On
one side was his oath of allegiance to the King. On the other was the
prospect of a civil war which would be ruinous to France, which he, at
the head of his army, had it in his power to prevent. It became borne
in on him as his duty to the country in the circumstances to throw his
influence on the side of his old comrades and Napoleon. His personal
grievances against the Bourbons rankled in his mind, and self-interest
urged him to go with the stream; but it was rather a sense of duty
and patriotism, to avert a civil war, that impelled Ney to take the
action that he did. His final decision was influenced by an insidiously
worded letter from Napoleon, playing on Ney’s personal feelings and
calling him by his old name of “the Bravest of the Brave.” The letter
was brought to him by two secret emissaries on the night of March 13,
who urged on the marshal that his soldiers were about to abandon him,
and that it was impossible for him single-handed to hope to stem the
current of national feeling. That and the letter turned the scale. Ney
decided to abandon the cause of the Bourbons.

Assembling his troops on parade next day, he publicly declared for
Napoleon in a fiery proclamation addressed to the Army. “Officers,
under-officers, and soldiers,” Ney began, reading out the proclamation
from on horseback in front of the assembled battalions, “the cause
of the Bourbons is lost for ever! The dynasty adopted by the French
nation is about to reascend the throne. To the Emperor Napoleon, our
Sovereign, alone belongs the right of reigning in our dear country.”
The proclamation concluded with these words: “Soldiers, I have often
led you to victory. I will now conduct you to that immortal phalanx
which the Emperor Napoleon is leading towards Paris. It will arrive
there within a few days, when our hopes and our happiness will be for
ever realised. Long live the Emperor!”

The declaration came as fire to a train of gunpowder. Ney had hardly
uttered a dozen words before frantic exclamations and shouts burst
forth; shakos and caps and helmets were raised and waved on muskets and
swords, amid tumultuous cries of “Vive l’Empereur!” “Vive le Maréchal
Ney!” The men broke their ranks and rushed headlong round Ney, catching
hold of him and kissing his hands and feet and uniform: “those not near
enough kissing his embarrassed aides de camp.” Shouted some: “We knew
you would not leave us in the hands of the _émigrés_!” The marshal at
the close was escorted back to his quarters amid a crowd of excited
soldiers cheering frantically.

The scene there was very different. Arrived in his quarters, Ney
found himself at once surrounded by a group of anxious and nervous
staff-officers and aides de camp. Said some: “You should have informed
us of it before, M. le Maréchal! We ought not to have been made
witnesses of such a spectacle!” One or two officers protested and
resigned on the spot. One aide de camp, indeed, a former _émigré_,
broke his sword in two and flung the pieces at Ney’s feet. “It is
easier,” he exclaimed passionately, “for a man of honour to break iron
than to break his word.”

“You are children,” was the marshal’s answer. “It is necessary to do
one thing or the other. What would you have me do? Can I stop the
advancing sea with my hands? Can I go and hide like a coward to avoid
the responsibility of events I cannot alter? Marshal Ney cannot take
refuge in the dark! There is but one way to deal with the evil--to take
one side and avert civil war. So we shall get into our hands the man
who has returned, and prevent his committing further follies. I am not
going over to a man, but to my country.”

[40] The silken standard flags attached below the Eagles were plainer
in design than the flags of 1804 and 1808. They were of the ordinary
pattern of the national banner, three vertical bands of colour, edged
with golden fringe. Lettered in gold on the white central band of the
flag was the Imperial dedication, worded similarly to the inscription
on the older flags, and on the reverse the names of the battles in
which the corps had taken part--“Austerlitz,” “Jena,” etc.

[41] Napoleon left Paris for the front on the early morning of June 12,
after spending several hours in his cabinet, issuing orders and making
arrangements for the carrying on of the Government in his absence.
Caulaincourt, acting for the time being as Foreign Minister, was with
Napoleon until the last moment, and witnessed his departure. “The
clock struck three, and daylight was beginning to appear. ‘Farewell,
Caulaincourt!’ said the Emperor, holding out his hand to me, ‘Farewell!
We must conquer or die!’ With hurried steps he passed through the
apartments, his mind being evidently fully taken up with melancholy
thoughts. On reaching the foot of the staircase, he cast a lingering
look round him, and then threw himself into his carriage and drove
away.”

[42] Trafalgar, on the French side, it may be added by the way, had a
distinguished representative at Waterloo in the person of the officer
at the head of the Artillery of the Imperial Guard, General Drouot.
He had fought against Nelson as a major of artillery doing duty in
the French fleet. His ship was one of the few that escaped into Cadiz
after the battle, whence he was recalled to join the Grand Army in the
Jena campaign. Drouot was the officer who, during the retreat from
Moscow--where he brought the artillery of the Guard through without
losing a gun--“washed his face and shaved in the open air, affixing
his looking-glass to a gun-carriage, every day, regardless of the
thermometer!”

[43] Napoleon--it may be of general interest to add--passed the
whole of the day, between the review in the forenoon and late in the
afternoon when he rode forward to witness the Guard start for the last
charge, on the ridge of high ground near Rossomme, So the memoirs of
the officers of his staff unanimously record. At no time was he near
the so-called “observatory,” in regard to which there has recently been
a controversy, based on the publication of a letter by the eminent
surgeon, Sir Charles Bell, who was at Waterloo, and rendered very
valuable service to the wounded. This is the story as told in his
letter by Dr. Bell:

“About half a mile of ascent brought us to the position of Bonaparte.
This is the highest ground in the Pays Bas. I climbed up one of the
pillars of the scaffolding, as I was wont to do after birds’ nests....
We got a ladder from the farm-court; it reached near the first
platform. I mounted and climbed with some difficulty; none of the rest
would venture.... The view was magnificent. I was only one-third up the
machine, yet it was a giddy height. Here Bonaparte stood surveying the
field.

“This position of Bonaparte is most excellent; the machine had been
placed by the side of the road, but he ordered it to be shifted. The
shifting of this scaffolding shows sufficiently the power of confidence
and the resolution of the man. It is about sixty feet in height. I
climbed upon it about four times the length of my body, by exact
measurement, and this was only the first stage. I was filled with
admiration for a man of his habit of life who could stand perched on a
height of sixty-five feet above everything, and contemplate, see, and
manage such a scene.”

Mention of the scaffold-platform is also made by Sir Walter Scott, who
rode over the field in August 1815. Sir Walter gives this version, in a
letter to the Duke of Buccleuch:

“The story of his (Napoleon’s) having an observatory erected for him
is a mistake. There is such a thing, and he repaired to it during
the action; but it was built or erected some months before, for the
purpose of a trigonometrical survey of the country, by the King of the
Netherlands.”

Thomas Kelly, an enterprising London publisher, went further. He had a
picture of the erection drawn, and brought it out as a popular print
in October 1815, under the title of “Bonaparte’s Observatory to view
the Battle of Waterloo.” The print shows a three-tiered structure,
apparently quite lately constructed, with three platforms, and ladders
leading from one platform to the other. Napoleon himself is depicted
on top, his spy-glass at his eye, and with two staff officers in
attendance.

There certainly was a structure of the kind on the field. Such a thing,
in a dilapidated condition, is to be seen in miniature on the Siborne
model of the battlefield at the Royal United Service Institution. It
is made to scale, and in its essential features bears out Dr. Bell’s
description. It stands close to the “wood of Callois” by the Nivelle
road, rather more than a mile to the south of Hougoumont. It has only
one platform, whence it would overlook the trees and give a good view
of the battle.

On the other hand, in addition to the silence of all Napoleon’s
officers on the subject, we have this plain statement from Frances Lady
Shelley, an intimate friend of the Duke of Wellington, who was in Paris
during the occupation after the battle and was also taken over the
battlefield by the Duke of Richmond some three months after Waterloo.
It appears in her recently published Diary, at p. 173, and may be taken
as settling the fate of the story of “this towering and massive perch,”
“that wonderful scaffold,” “that huge scaffolding,” “part of Napoleon’s
equipment at Waterloo,” as a modern historical writer calls it.

This is what Lady Shelley wrote at the time:

“Throughout the battle of Waterloo Napoleon remained on a mound, within
cannon shot, but beyond the range of musketry fire. He certainly was
not in the observatory after the battle began; nor could he have from
that spot directed the movements of his troops. That observatory was
built for topographical reasons by a former Governor of the Netherlands
something like a century ago.”

[44] The “fanion” of the second battalion of the 45th shared the fate
of the regimental Eagle. It fell to Private Wheeler of the 28th, the
“Slashers,” the present 1st Battalion of the Gloucestershire Regiment.
The 28th, on the left of Picton’s line, had, like the Highlanders,
charged forward among the French, following close after the Greys.
Wheeler, after a fierce fight with the bearer of the “fanion,” in which
he was severely wounded, bayoneted the French sergeant and carried off
the trophy. It disappeared in an unexplained manner some days later,
during Wellington’s march on Paris, while being forwarded to the Duke’s
head-quarters.

[45] The news of Waterloo reached Paris just twenty-four hours earlier
than it reached London--during the night of Tuesday, June 20. How it
was broken to the French capital forms a story little less dramatic
than the other story of how the news of Waterloo arrived in London. In
Paris they had had news of the successful opening of the campaign. On
the 18th, just as Napoleon was holding his last review, before Waterloo
opened, the “triumphal battery” of the Invalides was firing a _feu
de joie_ in honour of victory over Blücher at Ligny. On Monday and
Tuesday, the 19th and 20th, Napoleon’s Ligny Bulletin, with details,
was published in the _Moniteur_. When the cafés closed that evening,
there was as yet no word of Waterloo. But at that same moment the news
was arriving--in a private message to Carnot, the Minister of the
Interior. What had happened leaked out first at his house.

“On that evening,” describes M. Edgar Quinet, “several persons were
assembled at the house of M. Carnot, and they vainly asked him for
news. To evade these importunate questions, Carnot went to a card-table
and sat down with three of his friends. He from whom I have this story
sat opposite the Minister. By chance he raised his eyes and looked at
Carnot; he saw his countenance, serious, furrowed, with tears pouring
down it. The cards were thrown up; the players rose. ‘The battle is
lost!’ exclaimed Carnot, who could contain himself no longer.” The news
spread through Paris like wild-fire. It was not believed at first; the
catastrophe was too stunning, too terrible. To that succeeded a gloomy
stupor (une morne stupeur).

“They had not long to wait. All was known next morning. The astounding
news of the rout of the army in Belgium, and the still more astounding
news of the arrival of Napoleon in Paris, were spread through the great
city almost simultaneously, and stirred to the depths its restless and
volatile population. Twice before had Napoleon suddenly returned to
Paris--from Moscow, from Leipsic--and each time alone, without an army.
Thus had he again presented himself.”

[46] The Campaign of the Hundred Days, it has been estimated, from
first to last cost Napoleon in round numbers, in killed, wounded, and
prisoners taken in the field:

  Ligny (Killed and wounded)           10,000
  Quatre-Bras (Killed and wounded)      4,300
  Waterloo (Killed and wounded)        29,500
  Waterloo (Prisoners unwounded)        7,500
  Wavre (Killed and wounded)            1,800
  Lesser actions (Killed and wounded)   2,100
                                       ------
                               Total   55,200
                                       ======

Out of the 126,000 men with whom Napoleon took the field, he lost some
43 per cent. of his army in the week between June 15 and 22.

[47] Five Eagles were on show in London in the autumn of 1815, in
the so-called “Waterloo Museum,” having been acquired somehow on the
occupation of Paris. Two were described as the Eagles of the 5th of
the Line and of the Seamen of the Guard, and two as National Guard
Eagles--all four having been presented at the _Champ de Mai_. The fifth
purported to be the Eagle of the “Elba Guard.” None of the five had
ever been in action.




                                 INDEX


  Alexander, Czar of Russia, 96, 104, 109, 111, 275, 292, 318, 324, 326

  Aspern, Battle of, 204–10;
    Eagle buried on the battlefield, 204;
    two Eagles lost at, 205;
    at bay in the burning village, 207;
    Napoleon demands to see both Eagle and colonel, 208

  Auerstadt, Battle of, 127, 133–6;
    Davout under fire at, 134–5;
    Eagles under fire at, 135;
    Napoleon and the Third Corps, 136

  Augereau, Marshal, 37, 145, 155, 156, 157, 158, 164, 169;
    wounded at Eylau, 158;
    sends Marbot to save a regiment, 179;
    in disgrace, 364

  Austerlitz, Eagles in the battle:
    Eagle of the 15th Light Infantry rescued by the Commandant, 101;
    Eagle of the 111th rallies the regiment, 102;
    Eagle of the 108th in peril, 103;
    Eagle of the 10th Light Infantry rescued, 106;
    Eagle of the 24th Light Infantry lost, 108;
    fate of Eagle of 4th, 108–10;
    Eagle of the Chasseurs of the Guard saved by a dog, 112, 113;
    trophies sent to Notre Dame, 120–121;
    trophies disappear in 1814, 342


  Barrosa, Battle of, trophy stolen from Chelsea Hospital, 227–8;
    Colonel Vigo-Roussillon’s narrative, 229–31;
    how the 87th advanced, 229;
    fighting with their fists, 231;
    French colonel and General Graham, 230;
    French account of taking of “Eagle with Golden Wreath,” 232–3;
    as reported in the _Moniteur_, 233;
    Napoleon refuses to replace lost Eagle, 234;
    the “Aiglers,” 235

  Battalion Eagles, abolished, 183, 187–8;
    Napoleon’s anger at the Amsterdam review, 188;
    some supplied surreptitiously, 188;
    final orders issued, 189

  “Battle-honours,” as first authorised by Napoleon, 14, 15;
    adopted in other armies, 14;
    only selected names allowed, 191;
    on the flag of the Old Guard, 315;
    abolished at the Restoration, 350

  Beauharnais, Eugène, Viceroy of Italy, 29, 204, 275, 88

  Berlin, insolence of Prussian officers, 124;
    their fate, 146;
    Napoleon’s triumphant entry, 144–6;
    in the uniform of a French general, 145;
    demeanour of the citizens, 145;
    French soldiers in the streets, 143;
    march through, of Davout’s corps, 143–4;
    parade of captured Prussian flags in, 144;
    deputation of Senate carries trophies to Paris, 147

  Bernadotte, Marshal, 38, 98, 112, 139, 144, 151, 152, 295, 364;
    surprised at Möhringen, 150

  Berthier, Marshal, chief of the general staff of Grand Army, 10, 11,
        39, 40, 41, 125, 145, 188, 194, 195, 288, 296, 322, 323, 364;
    on campaign with Napoleon, 39–41;
    at an Eagle presentation, 194

  Bessières, Marshal, 29, 38, 110, 111, 177, 364

  Borodino, in the battle, 269–72;
    Eagles have several narrow escapes, 270–2;
    soldier’s personal narrative, 270

  Boulogne Camp, 10, 15, 19, 58, 61

  British trophies, destroyed at the Invalides, 333–5;
    naval flags among them, 335;
    the trophies now there, 344

  Brune, Marshal, 34, 39, 363


  Caesar, Eagle of, adopted by Napoleon, 9, 10

  Cambronne, General, 355, 60

  Campaign of 1813, fate of Eagles in: at the battles of the Katzbach,
        Dennewitz, Kulm, Grossbeeren, 298;
    Irish Legion saves its Eagles, 294–5;
    heroic feat of a soldier, 295–6;
    a short-sighted colonel, 297;
    the Eagle of the 17th escapes, 297–302;
    one lost in first day’s fighting at Leipsic, 303;
    Eagles buried or flung into the Elster, 304–305;
    dashing rescue by young officer, 306;
    Eagles after the capitulation of Dresden, 306–307;
    Eagle lost in a river in Eastern France, 307–8;
    “One against eight,” 308

  Caulaincourt, 169, 172, 173, 305, 322, 323, 373, 374

  “_Champ de Mai_,” 1815, 362–72;
    distribution of Eagles to the Last Army at, 369–72;
    why so called, 362;
    varying opinions on effect of, 372

  Champ de Mars, presentation of Eagles on, 15, 16, 20–1, 22–3, 43–59;
    personages who were there, 28–9, 31, 32, 35–42;
    taking the oath, 46–7;
    the final contretemps, 56–7

  Chapel Royal, Whitehall, reception of Wellington’s trophies in, 226,
        242, 430–1

  Charlemagne, Eagle and Insignia of, 8, 9, 27, 44

  Chasseur Eagles ordered to be withdrawn, 182

  Chasseurs, 4th, deputation to Napoleon, 31

  Chasseurs of the Guard, 25, 111, 416–20

  Chelsea Hospital, trophies, 214, 227, 243, 255;
    Barrosa trophy stolen, 227–8

  Clark-Kennedy, Sir A. K., takes an Eagle at Waterloo, personal
        narrative, 399, 401, 402, 403

  Cock proposed as National Emblem, Napoleon objects to it, 3, 4, 6

  “Cou-cous,” barrack-room nickname for the Eagles, 53;
    adventure of one at Jena, 133

  Cüstrin, surrender of fortress, 126, 142


  Danube flotilla in Austerlitz campaign, 82–3

  Davout, Marshal, 19, 29, 42, 98, 100, 101, 103, 4, 14, 34, 35, 36,
        143, 145, 166, 167, 267, 268, 269, 275, 363, 369

  Decoration of “Trois Toisons d’Or” proposed for Eagles, 186

  De Coster, Napoleon’s Waterloo guide, 377, 386, 397

  D’Erlon, General Drouet, at Waterloo, 381, 382, 384, 388, 392

  Disbandment of the Grand Army, Eagles at, 434–5

  Donzelot, General, at Waterloo, 391, 392, 410

  Dragoon Eagles ordered to be withdrawn, 182

  Dresden, surrender of, 1813, fate of the Eagles at, 307, 348–349

  Dupont, General, 64, 65, 66, 82, 83, 86–91, 93, 94, 106, 135;
    surrender of Bailen, fate of, 336, 7, 338;
    Minister of War at the Restoration, harsh conduct of, 349, 350

  Dürrenstein, combat at: Napoleon’s alarm on hearing sudden cannonade,
        81–2;
    forlorn-hope charge of the 100th and 103rd to save the Eagles, 89;
    heroism of Marshal Mortier at, 90;
    Eagles of the 9th and 32nd taken and retaken, 91;
    just saved at the last, 93

  Durutte, General, at Waterloo, 391, 410


  Eagle lost in Masséna’s retreat found in a river in Spain and now at
        Chelsea, 259–60;
    of Chasseurs of the Guard at Waterloo, 415;
    captured at Bailen recovered at Cadiz by French officer, 337

  “Eagle with the Golden Wreath,” taking of, at Barrosa, 231–3;
    fate of, at Chelsea, 227;
    origin of the Wreath, 235, 6

  “Eagle Guard,” institution of, after Eylau, 183–6;
    why Napoleon created it, 182;
    costume designed for Napoleon by Baron Lejeune, 185

  Eagles, allowed by Napoleon to be kept back on occasions, 260;
    ordered to be withdrawn from Spain, 261;
    proscribed at the Restoration, 246, 350, 434–6;
    those now at Invalides, 307–8, 435;
    two that were taken and retaken at Waterloo, 403–4;
    how all but two got through in the end, 420–1

  “Elba Guard,” Eagle of the, 353–5

  Elchingen, Ney’s heroism at, 66–8

  Elephant proposed as National Emblem, 5

  Ewart, Sergeant Charles, of the Scots Greys, takes an Eagle at
        Waterloo, personal account, 396, 397, 398

  Eylau Campaign, twelve Eagles lost, 166;
    Eagle of the 9th Light Infantry lost at Möhringen and found in a
        Russian ammunition wagon, 151–3;
    two Eagles taken on first afternoon of Battle of Eylau, 154;
    the 14th and 24th annihilated, and their Eagles carried off by
        Cossacks, 155–63;
    Marbot’s daring ride and narrow escape, 158–63;
    10th Light Infantry and 28th also annihilated and Eagles lost, 164;
    the 25th saves its Eagle, but loses all its officers, 165–7;
    Eagles of the 18th and 51st taken, 166–7;
    narrow escapes of the Eagles of the 17th and 30th, 168–9;
    four cuirassier regiments lose their Eagles, 169;
    Eagle of the Old Guard shot down, 172–3;
    two more Eagles lost at Friedland, 175–6


  “Fanions,” institution of, 183, 190;
    ordered for all second and third and extra battalions, 183;
    regulation colours of, 190;
    Napoleon’s opinion of their value, 190

  “First Grenadier of France,” Heart of the, narrow escapes in battle,
        164–5, 382

  Flag on the Eagle, design and details of, 10, 12–14, 191–3, 371

  Flags lost under the Republic recovered in arsenal at Innsbrück, 79;
    Marshal Ney presents on parade, 79;
    Napoleon’s special Bulletin, 80

  Fleur-de-lis proposed as National Emblem, 4, 7

  Fontainebleau, Eagle of the Old Guard at, 312–14

  Frederick the Great, 123, 124, 127, 134, 137, 144, 148, 149, 239,
        292, 293, 330, 332, 336, 344;
    his sword seized by Napoleon at Potsdam, 148, borne through the
        streets of Paris, 149;
    fate at the Invalides, 330, 332, 336


  Garcia Hernandez, action at, French square broken by the Hanoverian
        Dragoons, 255–8, 400

  Gazan, General, 82, 83, 86, 92, 94, 95, 232, 233, 262

  Golden Wreaths voted by Paris municipality for Eagles of Jena and
        Friedland, 177, 235–8;
    Napoleon orders the Austerlitz Eagles to be also decorated, 236

  Gough, Major Hugh, commanding 87th at Barrosa, 222, 235

  Graham, General, at Barrosa, 228, 229, 233

  Grätz, combat at, special inscription, “One against ten,” placed on
        Eagle of the 84th, 202–4

  Grouchy, General, 363, 385, 389, 390, 410, 411, 421, 422

  Guillemin, Porte-Aigle, of 8th of the Line, killed at Barrosa, 232

  Günsburg, storming of the bridge of, in the Ulm Campaign, heroism of
        Eagle-bearer of the 59th, 63–5


  Halle, rearguard, action at, after Jena, 125, 136–7

  Haslach, brilliant defence by Dupont, 65–6

  Horse Grenadiers after Waterloo, British officer’s tribute to,
        414–415

  Horse Guards Parade, display of captured Eagles on, 217–27, 241–2,
        429–31

  Hussar Eagles ordered to be withdrawn, 182


  Ice disaster at Austerlitz, 114–15

  Invalides, on the day of the destruction of the Eagles, 30;
    Frederick the Great’s sword and Jena trophies sent to, 148, 149;
    destruction of trophies at, in 1814: no orders till too late, 328–9;
    holocaust in the Court of Honour, 331–9;
    Russian officer sent to demand an account, 339–42;
    dome gilded by order of Napoleon from Moscow, 338;
    attempt at salvage of trophies, 339;
    Napoleonic trophies now at, 344, 435

  Irish Legion Eagle, presented by Napoleon on the Field of Mars, 51;
    narrow escape of coming to Chelsea, 293;
    saved from the Prussians in 1813, 294


  Jena Campaign, in the battle, 127–133;
    Napoleon and the Eagle of the 64th at Jena, 129;
    Eagle of the 76th at bay, 131;
    Eagle pocketed by a soldier, 132–3;
    Eagle of the 111th of the Line at Auerstadt, 135;
    Eagle of the 32nd at Halle, 136–7;
    Eagles paraded at the surrender of Magdeburg, 140;
    in the triumphal march through Berlin, 144;
    trophies paraded in Paris, 147–9;
    half trophies recovered in 1814, 343

  Jourdan, Marshal, 39, 363


  Katzbach, incident in battle at the, colonel sacrifices his life for
        his Eagle by mistake, 296–7

  Kazan Cathedral, St. Petersburg, Napoleonic trophies in, 150, 263–5,
        292

  Kempt, General, at Waterloo, 393, 407

  Keogh, Ensign Edward, 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers, heroic attempt to
        capture Eagle at Barrosa, 232

  Kleist, General, Governor of Magdeburg, surrenders to Ney, 139, 140–1;
    insulted by his officers, 143

  Kulm, defeat of Vandamme at, 1813, Eagle of the 17th saved after
        extraordinary adventures, personal narrative, 297–302


  Lannes, Marshal, 37, 38, 82, 98, 113, 114, 131, 132, 137, 139, 145,
        176, 332, 364

  Last Eagle presented to a regiment, 433–4

  Lefebvre-Desnouettes, General, 34, 288, 364

  Legion of Honour decoration affixed to a regimental standard, 186–7

  Leipsic, Battle of, fate of the Eagles cut off on right bank of the
        Elster, 303–6

  Light Infantry Eagles ordered to be withdrawn, 182

  Lion proposed as National Emblem of France, 7, 8

  Lobau, Count, at Waterloo, 383–384, 390, 416–17

  Lübeck, Blücher’s surrender at, and spoils from, 125, 139


  Macdonald, Marshal, at Wagram, 210, 211, 283, 293, 294, 318, 364

  Mack, General, in Ulm Campaign, 61, 62, 71, 72, 82

  Magdeburg, surrender of, to Marshal Ney, 125, 139–143

  Mamelukes of the Guard, 24–5, 110

  Marbot and the Eagle of 14th at Eylau, 158–63

  Marcognet, General, at Waterloo, 391, 393, 394, 395, 397, 410

  Marmont, Marshal, 75, 82, 244, 245, 246, 255, 317, 318, 319, 320,
        323, 324, 326, 327, 328, 364

  Masséna, Marshal, 35, 36, 79, 206, 209, 210, 259, 364, 415;
    heroic defence of Aspern, 206–10

  Masterton, Sergeant, 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers, captor of Eagle at
        Barrosa, 232–3

  “Mes braves Enfants de Paris,” Napoleon and 45th of the Line, 395–6

  Möhringen, surprise of Bernadotte at, 150–3

  Moncey, Marshal, 38, 149, 363

  Morlay, Lieutenant, Eagle-bearer of the Old Guard at Eylau, 171

  Mortier, Marshal, 29, 38, 81–7, 90–4, 106, 288, 317–19, 320, 324,
        326, 363

  Moscow Campaign, Russian trophies, spoils, and other mementoes of the
        retreat, 263–266;
    fate of Eagles at Borodino, 270–1;
    Cuirassier regiment loses its Eagle and finds it again, 272;
    surprise of Murat, at Vinkovo, 275;
    at Wiasma, the only survivor of a regiment, 276–7;
    after Wiasma, midnight ride of two officers, 282;
    Ney orders the Eagles to be destroyed, 284;
    at Krasnoi, loss of the Eagle of the 18th, 285;
    concentrated near the Imperial Guard, 287;
    at the Beresina, Eagle broken up and buried, 289;
    after the Beresina, Eagles buried in the snow, 290

  “Moustache,” dog of Chasseurs of Guard, at Austerlitz, 112–13

  Murat, Prince, King of Naples, 23, 38, 43, 44, 45, 46, 57, 61, 66,
        67, 113, 114, 125, 128, 138, 154, 169, 170, 182, 274, 283, 288,
        352, 364


  Napoleon: with Berthier on campaign, 40–1;
    oration at Eagle presentations, 46;
    at the surrender of Ulm, 70–4;
    sees the rout of the 4th at Austerlitz, 109–10;
    at Eylau, 158–9, 169–170, 172–4;
    meeting Eagles on the march, 193;
    numerous wounds of, 201;
    forlorn-hope attempt to save Paris, 319–23;
    during the battle at Waterloo, 386–7, 389–90, 397, 409–10;
    witnesses the rout of the Guard, 409;
    retreating in the square of the Old Guard, 411–14

  Naval Eagle, only one now existing, 46–50

  Ney, Marshal, 19, 42, 62, 63, 65–9, 71, 75, 78–9, 80, 82, 130, 131,
        136, 139–41, 144, 150, 176, 259, 267, 276–7, 281–6, 288, 291,
        293, 303, 318, 336, 354, 357–60, 377, 385, 389, 390–2, 406–8;
    superintends the surrender at Ulm, 70–1;
    defilade of garrison of Magdeburg before, 140–1;
    heroism of, in retreat from Moscow, 281–4, 286;
    orders his Eagles to be destroyed, 284;
    at Waterloo, 390, 2, 406–8.


  Officers’ guard accompanies Eagles throughout Moscow retreat, 286–7,
        289–90

  Official Eagle regulations and instructions, 11, 12, 13, 188–90, 268–9

  Old Guard, full-dress uniform always carried for triumphal parades,
        146, 273, 382;
    Eagle of, at Eylau, 169, 171–2;
    charge of, at Eylau, 170–1;
    how recruited and privileges, 179–80;
    Eagle of, recrosses the Niemen, 291;
    existing Eagle of the Grenadiers, 314–15;
    escort Napoleon from Waterloo, 411–415

  Oudinot, Marshal, 54, 98, 112, 287, 293, 308, 318, 364


  Pack, General, Sir Dennis, at Waterloo, 393, 407

  Percy, Major the Hon. Henry (11th Light Dragoons), brings
        Wellington’s Waterloo despatch to England, 424–5, 427–428

  Petit, General, at Waterloo, 311, 312, 313, 314, 350, 412, 413, 417

  Picton, General Sir Thomas, at Waterloo, 246, 389, 393, 394, 399

  Pierce, Lieutenant, 66th Regiment, takes Eagle at Salamanca, 253

  Polytechnic, school flag burned after surrender of Paris, 327

  Pope and the Coronation, Napoleon’s first views as to presence of in
        Paris, 3

  Pratt, Ensign, 30th Regiment, takes Eagle at Salamanca, 254

  Presentation of Eagles by Napoleon in the field, 194–6, 268–9, 305

  Prussian army, before Jena, 123–5;
    hopeless demoralisation of after, 125–126, 137–8, 142–3;
    fugitives from Jena cause break-up of Auerstadt troops, 127–8

  Prussian prisoners in France, Napoleon’s orders in regard to, 46, 7


  Rapp, Colonel, of the Mamelukes, at Austerlitz, 110–11

  Ratisbon, heroic fight in defence, 199;
    Eagle of 65th buried in cellar, 197–201

  Reception of the Old Guard in Paris after Friedland, 177–9

  Regimental numbers abolished by the Bourbons at Restoration, feeling
        among the soldiers, 351–2

  Reille, General, at Waterloo, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 388, 410

  Retiro, Madrid, two Eagles taken at surrender of, now at Chelsea,
        259–60

  Russian Cuirassiers of the Guard at Austerlitz, 108–9


  St. Cyr, Marshal, 9, 283, 291, 302, 307, 348, 364

  St. Hilaire, General, at Austerlitz and Eylau, 104, 7, 163

  St. Petersburg Dragoons take two Eagles at Eylau, 153–4

  Salamanca, Battle of, 243–5;
    Wellington’s diploma victory, 243;
    Marmont carried wounded off the field, 244;
    charge of Heavy Cavalry at, three regiments ridden down, 250–2;
    two Eagles taken at, 253–5

  Saving of the Eagle of the Chasseurs of the Guard at Austerlitz,
        418–20

  Schönbrunn review after Austerlitz, 4th of the Line censured by
        Napoleon at, 116–20

  Serrurier, Marshal, Governor of the Invalides, 34, 328, 9, 330, 331,
        2, 363

  Smolensk, Eagles in the attack on, 267–8;
    new regiment wins its Eagle at, 268–9

  Soult, Marshal, 19, 29, 41, 42, 58, 98, 99, 100, 103, 4, 12, 13, 14,
        16, 127, 129, 139, 155, 163, 164, 197, 337, 363, 377, 385, 386,
        390, 414, 416

  Spandau, surrender of fortress of, to squadron of hussars, 126

  State procession of Napoleon to Champ de Mars for presentation of
        Eagles, 24–30

  Stettin, surrender of, 126, 138

  Styles, Corporal, 1st Royal Dragoons, at Waterloo, takes charge of
        captured Eagle, 402


  “Temple of Victory” for the trophies of the Grand Army, Napoleon’s
        proposals for the Madeleine as, 175

  Trophies taken in the Jena Campaign, Napoleon’s disposal of, 138–9,
        141, 144, 147–8

  Trophy Eagles at Vienna, 204–5, 292

  Tyrol Campaign, 1805, storming of the heights before Innsbrück by
        Marshal Ney, Eagles signal main attack, 78–9


  Ulm Campaign, Eagles in:
    Eagle of 59th at Günsburg, 63;
    Eagle of the 6th Light Infantry heads the attack at Elchingen, 67–8;
    paraded at the surrender of Ulm for the Austrian prisoners to pass
        before, 69;
    humiliating march past of defeated Austrian army, 69–77;
    trophies sent by Napoleon to Paris, 77–8


  Vandamme, General, 104, 107, 116, 297, 298, 299, 300, 422

  Victor, Marshal, 238, 287, 288, 318, 364

  Vigo-Roussillon, Lieut.-Col., of the 8th of the Line, at Barrosa,
        229, 230, 231, 233

  Villeneuve, Admiral, after Trafalgar, 49, 50, 120, 382

  Vincennes, Artillery Depôt of, Eagles sent to, for destruction at the
        Restoration, 346–7, 434


  Wagram Campaign:
    Eagle of the 65th hidden in a cellar at Ratisbon, wrapped in
        Austrian flags, unearthed, and presented to Napoleon, 200–1;
    “One against ten,” the Eagle of the 84th, 202–4;
    Eagle of the 9th buried on the battlefield at Aspern, 204;
    Eagles of the 35th, 95th, and 106th taken, 204–5;
    Macdonald’s column at Wagram; five regiments rally round their
        Eagles, 212–13

  Waterloo Campaign:
    Eagles in, Napoleon’s parade of, before the battle, 380–2;
    taking of Eagle of the 45th, 396–7;
    two other Eagles stated to have been taken and recovered, 398–9,
        403–5;
    “fanion” of the 45th taken and lost while on the march, 399;
    taking of the Eagle of the 105th, 400–3;
    “fanion” of the 105th found at Abbotsford, 403;
    Eagle of the 1st of the Line before Hougoumont saved by colonel,
        405;
    Eagles of the Guard in the last attack, 406;
    Eagles of the 8th and 95th, 408;
    Eagle of the Old Guard escorts Napoleon off the field, 412–14;
    news of, in London, 426–9;
    in Paris, 429.

  Wellington, mentioned, 51, 223, 224, 8, 33, 34, 242, 243, 245, 246,
        250, 253, 259, 260, 336, 380, 383, 384, 385, 388, 389, 390,
        399, 400, 404, 424, 429


_Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury._




Transcriber’s Notes


Punctuation, hyphenation, and spelling were made consistent when a
predominant preference was found in the original book; otherwise they
were not changed.

Simple typographical errors were corrected; unbalanced quotation
marks were remedied when the change was obvious, and otherwise left
unbalanced.

Illustrations in this eBook have been positioned between paragraphs
and outside quotations. In versions of this eBook that support
hyperlinks, the page references in the List of Illustrations lead to
the corresponding illustrations.

Footnotes, originally at the bottoms of the pages that referenced them,
have been collected, sequentially renumbered, and placed at the end of
the main text, just before the Index.

Odd-page running headings appear here as Sidenotes, usually placed near
relevant text. Some of the sidenotes refer to text in footnotes, and
the footnotes in this eBook are at the end of the main text, not on
their original pages.

The index was not systematically checked for proper alphabetization or
correct page references.

The index often shortened page numbers in a sequence, e.g., “144, 51,
52”. In this ebook, those page numbers have been expanded to their full
size, e.g., “144, 151, 152”. However, it is possible that some were
missed.

Page 8: “éploye” was printed that way, without an acute accent on the
final “e”.

Page 68: “Duc D’Elchingen” was printed as “Due D’Elchingen”; changed
here.

Page 387: “A present il est fini” was printed that way, without an
acute accent over the “e” in “present”.

Page 413: “presentaient” was printed that way, without an acute accent
over the first “e”.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WAR DRAMA OF THE EAGLES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


