The Project Gutenberg eBook of The house without windows & Eepersip's life there
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The house without windows & Eepersip's life there

Author: Barbara Newhall Follett

Commentator: Wilson Follett

Release date: February 6, 2025 [eBook #75304]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1927

Credits: Hendrik Kaiber


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE WITHOUT WINDOWS & EEPERSIP'S LIFE THERE ***

The
House Without Windows
&
Eepersip's Life there

by

Barbara
Newhall
Follett

Alfred A. Knopf

New York MCMXXVII London

FOR
MY TWO PLAYMATES
J. H.
AND
S. W. F.

I - The Meadow
II - The Sea
III - The mountains
Historical Note



I
THE MEADOW

Flowers have faded,
Butterfly wings are weary,
And far off is the charting of the
eternal sea.

In a little brown shingled cottage
on one of the foothills of Mount Varcrobis, there lived with her
father and mother, Mr. and Mrs. Eigleen, a little girl named Eepersip.
She was rather lonely. She kept advising Mr. and Mrs. Eigleen to
make a beautiful garden, where flowers would bloom year after year,
and to which birds and butterflies would come back again and again.
Accordingly all three set to work with a will, and in a few years they
had made the most beautiful garden that was ever seen. Around its
borders bloomed apple-trees, pear-trees, and peach-trees, and inside
them bloomed azaleas, rhododendrons, magnolias, lilacs, honeysuckle,
and fire-blossoms. Next came the ground flowers. There were seven kinds
of roses, and there was a whole corner devoted to early spring flowers:
crocuses, daffodils, squills, and narcissi. Another corner was carpeted
with tender anemones, all snow-white. In the centre of the garden there
was a circular bed filled with iris of all kinds and colours. Clematis
and morning-glory vines climbed over the wooden benches, and near the
centre was a tall arch with ramblers climbing all over it. Another bed
was thickly clustered with great purple violets. The paths through the
garden had gracefully bending ferns on each side.

For the first few months Eepersip was delighted with her flowers, and the
butterflies and birds pleased her even more. But she was not a child who could
be contented easily, and pretty soon she began to feel lonely again. One
July day a fresh idea came into her head. She packed some sandwiches
and some crackers in a small lunch-basket. Without telling a soul,
the next morning before dawn she slipped out of bed, dressed, and
picked up her basket; then she stole out of the cottage and away. She
went east from her home on a shady path through beautiful woodlands,
with here and there a grove of great massive pines. And as she walked
she sang merrily.

After quite a while she stepped out of the
woodlands on to a large lawn. Close to the path there was a pool with
some tiny goldfishes swimming about in it. Then she knew that she was
nearing a house, and instead of pacing slowly along the path she began
to run; for she was afraid that someone would see her and send her
back home. But after a few minutes she grew tired and settled down to
a reasonable pace. And as she slowed down she came into an enormous
field of rhododendrons, lavender, white, and brilliant red. Oh, what
a gorgeous place that was! As Eepersip walked along, an oriole sang
from a bush; she peeped into a humming-bird's nest with two tiny white
eggs in it; she startled a vireo from its nest in a low clump of grass,
and, peeping into it, found three baby birds. The farther she went the
more her heart began to leap within her for joy of the life she was
finding for herself. Her loneliness decreased, and she was as free and
happy as the birds or butterflies.

Soon the red and lavender
rhododendrons dropped out, leaving only the white; then the white ones
too lessened in thickness until there were none left. All this while
she had been slowly climbing Mount Varcrobis itself. At last she came
into a small open glade, still walking east from the cottage--which
she was not thinking about just then, so happy was she at thought of
the new, interesting life she had found. This glade was near the top
of the mountain, only one high peak towering above it. Across it ran
a little brook, tinkling through the ferns and bracken.

She paused on the path suddenly, then drew back; for a doe and her daisied
fawn were grazing close by. Eepersip took from her basket a lump of
sugar, and held it out to the beautiful creatures. Very hesitatingly
the doe moved forward, followed by her fawn, and at last took the lump
of sugar from Eepersip's fingers.

Eepersip had not expected
this. On the contrary, she had thought that they would be startled
and would bound away out of sight in the woods. She gazed silently at
the doe, who had begun to graze again without a sign of fear. Could
it be a dream? she thought. Eepersip had experienced the delightful
sensation of the doe's slightly rough tongue around her fingers; and
suddenly, she felt as if she could never leave them--as if she must
stay always and play with the woods. Already she had become acquainted
with a doe and a fawn, and they were not afraid of her! She sat down
on the grass, and the fawn lay beside her. She cuddled it close in
her arms.

Then it grew dark. The sun was sinking, and at last
it went behind a thin, filmy cloud, producing wonderful colours, red,
gold, silver, and purple. Like fire it glowed and quivered, and through
it all could be seen the ball of the sun, growing clearer as it sank,
and growing larger too. And as Eepersip sprang to her feet and watched
it glow and quiver, she saw, away off, an enormous range of mountains;
and where the mountains left off there was the edge of the ocean, with
the light of the dying day reflected in it, in purples, reds, and
yellows.

And then, being very tired, she lay down on the grass
beside the two deer; and in a few seconds she was sound asleep.

The next morning Eepersip was surprised to find herself lying
there on the grass between the doe and her fawn; she had forgotten
about running away. The first thing she thought of was her breakfast;
for, not having anything to eat the day before except a few handfuls
of delicious red berries which she had found growing on a thick vine,
she was very hungry. Not a sandwich in her basket had she touched; she
had been so fascinated with her adventure that she had not thought of
them. But now she ate three whole ones, ever and again breaking off
bits and feeding them to the deer.

When she had finished, she
set off in a great hurry to explore her surroundings. First she walked
in the direction of the beautiful sunset she had seen, a little off
the direction of the path by which she had ascended, and came to a
great rocky precipice, the side of the mountain. She looked down; and
far off she saw a shining river, winding about in the valley below,
sometimes twisting back upon itself, then straightening out again. But
it made her giddy to look too long, and she turned and started back to
where she had slept. The doe and her fawn were grazing quietly when
Eepersip returned. She threw herself on her back and gazed at the clear
blue sky. In it swallows with their snowy breasts were circling, and
when the sun shone full on them their white wings glimmered like the
ice on a winter's day. A great desire came over Eepersip. She wanted
to fly and swoop through the air like the swallows. She thought to
herself that they had always been her favourite birds. She had always
marvelled at their flight, as now they twisted in giant corkscrews and
now swerved so as to turn almost completely over.

A butterfly
flew over her head--a little yellow butterfly who danced and glimmered
before her. Her brown eyes sparkled with delight. A cricket hopped
and twittered; a bird burst into song. Almost without knowing what
she did, Eepersip leaped into the air and began to dance, with the
swallows circling above her head and the leaves fluttering about her.
Then suddenly she sat down, breathless. She began stripping off her
shoes and stockings. Her feet were tender, and every stick she stepped
on hurt; but she was determined to get her feet toughened so as to go
barefoot all the time.

Now, directly east of this fairy glade
there was steep slope which ascended to the very summit of Mount
Varcrobis, called Eiki-ennern Peak. Eepersip had a fascinated eye for
this slope and longed to see what was at the top of it, but she would
not leave the deer just yet, and also she was determined not to put
on her shoes and stockings again. So she decided to stay in the soft
grass until her feet were toughened; and she thought that then she
could go up that wonderful peak over which the sun rose in clouds of
glory every morning.

Before Eepersip had danced long she walked
down toward the great precipice again, with her shoes and stockings
under her arms. The instant the got there a madness came upon her,
and _whizz!_ two shoes and two stockings were flying through the
air at a tremendous rate. They landed in the trees far below, while
Eepersip, glad to get rid of them, coolly returned to the glade,
thinking that her feet were already tougher than before because of that
bold act. When she got back she decided to rest a while, then walk in
the opposite direction and see what was at the northern end of the
glade. So when she got rested she started off that way, with the doe
and the fawn trotting beside her. At last she came to the slope of the
mountain on that side. But this, instead of being a sheer precipice,
was a gradually falling grassy bank, down which they went. The doe
and the fawn followed some distance; then they turned back, letting
Eepersip go on alone. But when she got part way to the bottom she began
to see houses; and so, deciding that that wasn't the side for her,
she ran back as fast as she could.

Meanwhile Mr. and Mrs.
Eigleen were wondering in vain where their poor child had gone. At
first they hadn't thought much about her, for she had been lost in the
woods several times before and had always found her way home safely.
But when it came to being gone two or three whole days, why, they were
not sure that they were awake! The child must be starving, and who
knew what a tender morsel to some prowling animal she might be by this
time? So they began to grieve greatly over their loss, for they dearly
loved Eepersip.

Before they has missed her very long, a poor old
woman and her husband had climbed that part of Mount Varcrobis. Nobody
in the village down below cared much for Mr. and Mrs. Ikkisfield, as
they were called; and they had decided to go elsewhere and see if
they could find some friends. The Eigleens took pity on them, and at
last persuaded them to live in the brown cottage in the woods, and
to let the Eigleens themselves go to the house of friends of theirs,
the Wraspanes. It was the Wraspanes' rhododendron field that Eepersip
had thought so beautiful.

The Eigleens, being exceedingly kind
people, gladly gave up their cottage and their beautiful garden to Mr.
and Mrs. Ikkisfield. Indeed, these things were no joy to them, now
that they had lost Eepersip, for whose sake they had made the garden.
The old couple were delighted, and, thanking the Eigleens very kindly,
they moved in that same evening, the Eigleens leaving some of their
belongings with them.

Eepersip stayed for many days with the
doe and her fawn, and then, her feet having become tough, she crossed
the brooklet and went on up Eiki-ennern Peak. Near the top, in a small
sheltered place, she found a dear little pool surrounded with moss and
ferns, amongst which some iris bloomed. It had a sandy bottom, over
which swam tiny silver minnows. When they turned over and the sun shone
on their bellies Eepersip saw a streak of silver. At last, when she got
to the top, she saw that on one side it was a vast daisied slope, down,
down; and on another it was wooded to the foot. From where she stood,
range after range spread out before her, lake after lake beneath her,
with the crimson of the now setting sun gloriously reflected in them.
It was like fairyland. And when Eepersip turned southward, she beheld
the almighty ocean with the exquisite sunset colours reflected in it as
in the lakes. That night she slept on a soft bed of moss in a hollow
down near the pool.

The next morning, after she had made a good
breakfast on the juicy root of a plant which she found, she lay down by
the pool and gazed at the sky, the way she had done on the second day
of her wildness. And as she lay there it grew so quiet that a chipmunk
stole out of a tiny hole that he had dug between the roots of a tree.
He came to her, sniffed at a cracker she was munching, and tickled her
cheek with his nose; whereupon she cautiously put out her hand with a
piece of the cracker on it. The chipmunk was frightened and ran away.
But the piece of cracker looked very tempting, and before long he
lost his fear and ventured close again. Step by step he crept along,
until, with a frightened squeal, he seized the piece and disappeared.
Eepersip waited, laughing. In a few minutes he came back again, and
this time he took the piece that she held out to him, running only a
few steps. The third time he took it calmly and deliberately and ate
it without running at all, evidently convinced that Eepersip was a
friend. And the fourth time he was even more bold, going so far as
to sit on her stomach while he ate. But by that time, between them,
they had licked the platter clean--the cracker was gone.

"Just
like the doe and her fawn," Eepersip thought. How fearless he was,
the fuzzy brown little creature! It seemed to happy Eepersip that all
the wild was ready to make friends, as if nothing were afraid of her.
She felt more than ever that she could never leave these entrancing
forests. She could never, never go back, she mused. How wonderful it
was to lie there watching the things that were happening, and actually
to have one of the inhabitants of these woods--a timid one that was
usually afraid--come up to her and eat from her hand! This adventure
had certainly tightened in her heart the desire to stay always and
become acquainted with more and more creatures--with the swallows she
loved so well, and with the little fairy butterflies.

Whenever
she went down to the sheltered spot by the pool, she saw so many
beautiful things here and there that she never knew what to do in her
delight. Iris blossomed in gold and blue; butterflies danced overhead
like yellow rose-petals flying in the breeze. Once, running over to
the pool, she found a tiny beach, about fifteen inches long and half
a foot wide--no more than a handful of sand completely hidden in a
forest of ferns. Across it ran the chipmunk's footprints, and the marks
of his wee claws could be plainly seen in the damp sand. That little
beach was the earth's dear treasure, so it seemed to Eepersip, alone
in that wild place. In the fields all around, thousands of buttercups
blossomed, and great beds of daisies whitened the earth's brown
surface.

In one place, among dark ferns, grew columbine, gay
little gypsies curtseying in the breeze. Their colours spoke to her of
dawn, gold sunset and white clouds, snow-banks fringed with icicles,
night sky entwined with moonbeams, black clouds and radiant sun, or
orange, yellow, and scarlet leaves--autumn leaves. She gathered some,
and made a rainbow wreath of blossoms; and curling about her hair,
they danced again.

Beneath the branches of a white pine grew
blushing lady-slippers, which Eepersip had never seen before. "Dawn
comes to earth sometimes," she thought, "bringing her flower-clouds and
clasping them with pearl seeds."

Eepersip was anxious to know
what was on the southern slope of this highest peak of Mt. Varcrobis.
So one day along she went, happily singing, until she came to it. Then
she was surprised to find that this slope, instead of being a rocky
precipice as the one had been at the foot of Eiki-ennern Peak, went
down steeply for a little way and then broadened out into an enormous
field, on the farther side of which was a herd of deer. Away, away,
Eepersip could just see to the edge of this plain-like field. With a
shout, down she dashed; and, dancing as she had never danced before,
she sang like a nightingale for joy of her discovery. And yet, she
thought to herself, what if it should be a dream? She was quite sure
that it was not, though, for she had felt decidedly awake when she
started off. But, because she had started before anyone else was up or
even awake, she thought that she might be asleep herself. Anyhow, if
it was a dream, it was a lovely one, and she need not worry

But now let us return to the grieving parents of Eepersip, who were
consulting the Wraspanes about a plan to search for her. At last
Mrs. Eigleen said: "Something very queer has happened to our child.
She must have seen something or other that has made her want to go
off. But I will tell you what we can do. We'll take the Wraspanes' big
tent, and, fetching the Ikkisfields, we can camp near where one of us
sees Eepersip; for I'm sure that she wouldn't leave Mount Varcrobis
unless absolutely compelled to. We can learn what habits Eepersip has
got into, and perhaps we can catch her by some plan. My husband and
you, Mr. Wraspane, are the spry ones, and perhaps you can hide behind
trees and catch her when she goes past."

"What a grand idea!" cried
everybody else in one voice; and without further ado they decided to
carry it out.

So the very next day Mr. Eigleen and Mr. Wraspane
set off to explore, on the chance of finding Eepersip or discovering
where she was living. They reasoned out that Eepersip must have gone
through the Wraspanes' land when running off; because on the western
side of the Eigleens' little cottage there was a dense wood, of which
Eepersip had always been rather afraid, it was so dark and mysterious.
They went through the field of rhododendrons, on the selfsame path, and
at last came out in the same small glade in which Eepersip had seen
the deer, with the same brooklet running across it. They hunted all
over it, but no trace of Eepersip could they find. They began to feel
foolish. They decided to go back and tell the waiting folks that they
had not seen a glimpse of her, when a glorious burst of singing reached
their ears. Immediately they turned and ran in the direction of the
voice. But still they didn't see her, for they never dreamed that she
had gone up the steep slope of Eiki-ennern Peak. And they began to feel
still more foolish.

At last, after a lot of aimless wandering
through forests, glades, and fields, they decided to give it up for
just then and tell the folks that they had heard her, but couldn't
find her. So back they went, feeling very foolish indeed.

"We
were looking for her everywhere," said Mr. Eigleen, "and after we had
searched for a long time we heard this excellent singing, better than
I thought she could utter, and we went in its direction, but couldn't
find her. So I am beginning to think that 'twasn't she at all--either
she or a fairy."

"Fairy!" exclaimed Mrs. Eigleen, indignantly
--"fairy! There is no such thing as 'fairy'--stupid!"

Mr. Eigleen cast a wink at his partner hunter, Mr. Wraspane. "Anyhow," said
he, "fairy or none, we heard the singing."

Again Mrs. Eigleen burst out with: "But why didn't you go right _to_ the sound?"

"Dear wife," said Mr. Eigleen, "we couldn't, because directly in
front of that sound there was a very steep rocky slope--you know
very well the slope of Eiki-ennern Peak."

"Well," said Mrs.
Eigleen, "if the voice came from behind that slope, Eepersip must have
got to the top of Eiki-ennern Peak somehow, and if _she_ did,
_you_ can. Wait with us a while and have lunch, and then go and
try to find her again, and I will come with you."

"All right," said Mr. Eigleen.

Accordingly, after lunch all three started
off on a fresh quest. They searched the little glade high and low
once more, but with the same ill luck. Really Eepersip saw them all
the time, but while they were here she was there, and while they were
there she was here, all the time keeping out of sight behind bushes
and trees: And when she rustled the leaves and they heard her, they
thought that it was just the breezes making commotion in the leaves
and grass.

Before they had hunted very long Mrs. Eigleen had
to admit that the new game was harder than it looked; yet she didn't
give it up, for her greatest hope was to have Eepersip back again. At
length Eepersip lost sight of them and, thinking that they had gone,
she began to sing. They all started, and began to run in the direction
of the voice. This time they didn't hesitate to go right up the steep
slope of Eiki-ennern Peak. Mrs. Eigleen leading, they all three dashed
up, with not a thought of the brambles that they were getting into.

When they got to the top, what a sight met their puzzled eyes! There
was Eepersip dancing to her own singing, and ever and again she looked
up at a little butterfly which fluttered over her head, and curtseyed
before it. Great waves of happiness were flowing through her all the
time. They made no effort to call her, but only stood enchanted until
she danced off to the field. Then they quickly walked away. First
they went back to their own little cottage and collected some of the
important belongings which they had left there. Next they went on to
the Wraspanes' house and got the tent and other necessary things. Then,
with the Ikkisfields and the Wraspanes, they started off for the top
of Eiki-ennern Peak.

They pitched the tent rather far from the
pool, but very near where they had seen Eepersip, on top of the hill.
Now the next problem was to make the plans; and as soon as the tent
was up they gathered together and began to think up ways and means.
But Mr. Eigleen said: "Let us go on an exploration and discover some
of Eepersip's habits. Let us all wander around a while, and when we
discover what sort of habits Eepersip has got into, we can make our
plans accordingly; for we can't make plans until we _do_ know
some of her habits."

All approved of what he had said, and
everybody prepared himself for a long walk, interrupted at times by
hiding and lurking, peeping and sneaking. So each person had a bite
to eat and set off to explore the surroundings. They hunted high and
low, but never saw a sign of Eepersip--never had a chance to peep and
sneak. That evening however, while they were talking things over, they
heard another burst of singing. They leaped to their feet and, taking
a big lantern, all started out of the tent. In the direction of the
singing they went on, trying to walk rather fast, but also trying not
to step on many leaves or dry twigs so as to make a noise; and when
they talked it was in the softest whisper. The singing sounded nearer
and nearer; but they could not see very well without the lantern (which
they didn't light yet for fear of frightening Eepersip away); it was
darkening rapidly, and things were very dim. At last the singing grew
so loud and so near that they felt almost as if they were about to run
into it. And so they actually did; for Eepersip, who had all the time
been approaching them as they approached her, went right between the
Ikkisfields, startling them so that they didn't know what to do! Mr.
Ikkisfield managed to put out his hand and grab her dress, calling
for someone to come and help him hold her. But by this time Eepersip
had discarded her real dress and had woven one of ferns for herself;
and, the ferns being interlaced rather loosely, the one Mr. Ikkisfield
caught hold of tore away. Quick as a flash Eepersip bounded away into
the night. Thus their first chance of catching her slipped between
their fingers. They went back to the tent rather discouraged.

Now the deer in the great field knew Eepersip, and they all loved
her, because she was so kind to them. Even the little fawns loved
her and made no attempt to run away when she appeared. Twilight and
dawn, when the deer were all lying down, were her favourite times in
the field. Then she would dance about in her fern dress, singing so
sweetly that all the birds watched her. She began to love the birds
and butterflies even more than in the first days of her wildness,
and almost worshipped them.

The morning after this curious
face-to-face meeting with Eepersip, Mr. Eigleen spoke about another
plan. "Eepersip every morning comes up from wherever she sleeps to
get a drink of water from the little pool. Now do you know that big
pine-tree that stands beside the pool?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Eigleen.

"Well, I will go and hide behind that tree tomorrow
morning, and when she comes up to the pool I will try to catch her
by jumping out at her when she comes by."

"Why do you not do it this morning?" inquired Mrs. Ikkisfield.

"Well, you see," replied Mr. Eigleen, "she has
had her morning drink, for I saw her as I was getting out of bed."

"I see," said Mrs. Ikkisfield.
"But be sure that you get up in time next morning."

"I will," said Mr. Eigleen. "But if you're up and awake before I am, be sure
to pull me by my left ear."

Eepersip was becoming more wary, now
she had discovered that they were trying to catch her. But still she
took it as a sort of joke. In the first place, she thought she could
easily escape again if they did catch her. But she very much doubted if
they could do it. For hours every day she practised running, leaping,
dancing, and prowling, until she was as fleet as a deer and as soft
on her feet as a lynx. She had practised leaping over high objects,
and if someone were chasing her she could now escape being cornered by
jumping a fence. She had trained herself until, even without a running
start, she could clear the back of a standing fawn, or, with a start,
a large buck standing full height. All these exercises made her light
as a feather and graceful as a fern.

The next morning when Mr.
Eigleen woke up, there was hardly a ray of light, but dawn was breaking
out here and there. Mr. Eigleen got all ready for an exciting morning.
Without waking anybody, he seated himself out in front of the tent, on
the side next the field, in such a position that he could see Eepersip
when she came up, and where he could pull-to the front flap immediately
and bolt out the back way to the tree by the pool without her seeing
him. He waited a few minutes, and then he saw her head bobbing up the
bank. Hurriedly he closed the front flap before she saw him. Slipping
out the other end and round in a long curve, he ran at full speed to
the pool and hid behind the big pine. Now it was at the foot of the
pine that Eepersip usually stooped over to drink, because there the
water was deeper and clearer. When Eepersip came up the bank, she
stared curiously at the ten, thinking: "What! are my parents still
here?" Then on she went to the pool. She approached it in a roundabout
direction, her face drawn with suspicion; but, as usual, her route
ended at the gnarled roots of the big pine--no instinct could draw
her away from it.

Mr. Eigleen stirred the leaves gently as she
bent over. She lay down flat by the tree, cupped her hands, and began
to drink. Very quietly Mr. Eigleen put his hands on her, one on either
shoulder, knowing that her dress of ferns would tear. She started,
and struggled so violently that his hands relaxed their grip on her
shoulders, sliding down her arms, so that they were now hand in hand.
That was all Eepersip needed. With a tremendous sweep she took her
feet off the ground, dragging down on his arms with all her weight and
strength. Mr. Eigleen couldn't relax either of his hands, for she now
held them fast. With another sweep she put her feet up on his shoulders
and over his head; then, wrenching her own hands free, she slid down
his back and slipped before he could seize her.

When Mr. Eigleen
went home everyone was surprised at this acrobatic adventure.

Mrs. Eigleen made a plan now. "Sometime at midnight," she said,
"we could take a covered lantern and go down on the meadow to try to
find out where Eepersip sleeps. I know the meadow is very large, but
common sense tells me that she would sleep near the woods; so to-morrow
night let's go and try to find her."

"Er--er--I don't know,"
replied Mr. Eigleen. "I'm a little bit afraid of that meadow, such
curious things are happening there all the time."

"What has
happened yet?" snapped Mrs. Eigleen. "You're an old coward, you are.
I'd go in a minute, to save Eepersip."

"So'd I, so'd I," said
Mr. Eigleen, hurriedly. "I only think that there is some curious magic
about that field."

"I agree with you there," said Mrs. Eigleen.
"But, as I said before, when it comes to saving Eepersip I'd go into
thicker magic than there is in the field."

So they planned to
get up a little after midnight and circle the field near the edge of
the woods; and as there were six of them, Eepersip wouldn't have much
chance of escaping if they once got their hands on her. That evening
they ate a light supper and went to bed early, and about one o'clock
they got up and went out into the great field with a hooded lantern.
They circled around it; and at last they found Eepersip hidden in the
bushes on the farther edge. Very gently all six laid hands upon her
at once.

"Ah, we've captured her!" they cried triumphantly.
"Our labours have been rewarded!"

But Eepersip, finding herself
caught, became angry, and cried in a loud, commanding voice: "Put me
down! Drop me immediately!" She added quietly to herself: "Now it's all
over."

Then she began to struggle very violently indeed. They
had hold of her securely, and so her struggles were in vain. But just
as they carried her past a sleeping doe which had no fawn, she uttered
a shrill, wild cry; and this so startled the six that they almost
dropped her. The doe woke up; and though she was afraid for herself,
she was more afraid for Eepersip. She came galloping after them.

To see the doe galloping swiftly toward them naturally startled old
Mrs. Ikkisfield, who supposed that all wild animals would flee at the
sight of a human being. That was so generally--but not when Eepersip
was in danger! Now, Mrs. Ikkisfield had hold of the most important part
of Eepersip's anatomy, though no one suspected it at the time--namely,
her feet. Mrs. Ikkisfield dropped them, and for the fraction of an
instant which Eepersip needed they were allowed to touch the ground.
Eepersip wrenched herself free and leaped to the back of the trembling,
excited creature, and they bounded away quick as a flash. The others,
agitated, turned to chase the doe; but she, with Eepersip on her
back, had vanished.

"Whew, that was a narrow escape!" Eepersip
whispered in one of the doe's long ears, as they lay down together.

The next day it rained hard. Eepersip's parents and their friends
spent much time making plans for a day when they could go out. Mrs.
Ikkisfield now made a suggestion

"It is," she said, "very like
the plan that we tried last night--namely, to find Eepersip while she
is sleeping. But we must have more people, more people! If we can get
some friends from the village at the foot of the mountain, they can
drive the deer that we meet away from the people that are carrying
Eepersip. In that way she cannot be saved by deer."

"That is
true," said Mrs. Eigleen; "but, you know, often an angry herd of deer
is a terrible thing to drive back."

"I know that," said Mrs.
Ikkisfield. "But we might be able to keep them cool--keep them from
getting angry. However, let's make some other plans now. That is not
a very good one."

"I was thinking," said Mrs. Wraspane, "if we
could only get Eepersip into a small fenced-in area where we could
catch her. But I have it: let us find Eepersip in her sleep again, and
carry her to the tent in a roundabout route through the woods, chopping
the bushes as we go, where there aren't so many deer, and where it will
be harder for them to rescue her."

"Great idea!" cried Mrs.
Ikkisfield.

So that is what they all planned to do, the next
sunny day.

While they had been conversing in this manner,
Eepersip had been sitting in the woods, with a little fawn and its
mother for company; and she had been feeding the fawn handfuls of grass
and gazing into its gentle eyes. Late in the evening it cleared off
and there were promises of a beautiful day to-morrow. And so it was.
The sun began to rise slowly, producing wonderful colours--first the
most delicate shades of apple-blossom pink; darker on the horizon, and
shading off into a pale buttercup yellow. And Eepersip, as she awoke,
saw that the meadow was dotted with dark forms which could just be
distinguished --the deer were all lying down.

Eepersip skipped
up to the pool to get her morning drink, first spying all around and
especially behind every tree. No one was to be seen, for no one was
up yet. Eepersip drank her fill; then she breakfasted on the sweet
root of the little three-leaved plant with a white blossom, her usual
food. After that she went down to the meadow, beginning to dance and
sing as soon as she got there. The deer were now beginning to rise,
and as she danced she kissed each one.

When the sun had dried
the raindrops and the dew, the families started out to the great field
to see what they could discover. The first thing they saw when they
got to the edge of the slope was Eepersip skipping around. Then they
saw her dance off to the woods and gather some long green branches and
blossoms. Very soon she came back to the field, went over to a sleeping
doe, and crowned her with the branches; upon which the doe got up and
licked Eepersip's cheek. She danced about in her delight. She was so
beautiful, so graceful, that when her parents saw her they were amazed
at the way in which her dancing and leaping had improved.

Now,
during the days in which Eepersip had been growing wild she had made
friends with another chipmunk, who was even more fond of her than the
one by the pool had been. The Eigleens and their friends now saw him
scutter out of the woods and frolic around Eepersip. Last of all they
saw Eepersip lie down on the grass to gaze at the sky.

"This
would be a splendid opportunity for catching her," muttered Mr.
Ikkisfield to Mr. Eigleen, as they looked at her.

"Hm! that's
just what I was thinking," whispered Mr. Eigleen in reply. "Suppose we
go out in the field and try."

They all tiptoed down the slope
and out into the field, where they immediately laid hands on Eepersip
once more. She started violently and cried out to the doe who was near.
The doe dashed up, but did not succeed in rescuing Eepersip, for Mrs.
Ikkisfield ran to hold her back.

"Never mind Eepersip--Mr.
Eigleen and Mr. Wraspane can do that. Hold back the deer!" thundered
Mrs. Eigleen, a slow red rising to her face. They all flew at the poor
creature, except the two who were holding the struggling Eepersip.
Off fled the doe; and then the others could help with Eepersip. The
doe ran on to get help from her mate. Back they came in no time, for
a deer is one of the swiftest runners in the world. The buck flew at
Eepersip's captors--just too late, for the others had succeeded in
getting Eepersip safely into the tent.

But what could they do
with her? How could they keep her securely? And, even so, if she was
going to continue acting wildly, how much better off were they with
her? This was a new question, which no one had thought of. But they
decided that, if they could keep her safely, she would become tamed
and civilized again. The question of security was the most important
just then. Better go home immediately and take Eepersip with them,
later returning for their tent and their belongings. This they did,
locking Eepersip in the house while they were getting their things;
and as they went they rejoiced.

But now all the deer of the
field, knowing that Eepersip, their beloved queen, had been taken from
them, put their heads together. They intended to rescue her while her
father and mother were sleeping, if they could only find where she had
been taken. While they were lying down and thinking about it, a fawn
came running up and poked its mother. It had followed softly, and knew
just where Eepersip was kept. They all lay down to wait for the coming
of night. At last evening came, and the deer fell asleep, leaving a
night-watchman to arouse them later when the full moon was at its
zenith. When the watchman signalled they arose and, with the little
fawn leading, went down toward the Wraspanes' house. Eepersip was
allowed to sleep out on the porch, but all its glass doors were closed
and locked against her. The fawn led them straight to this place.

Eepersip could not go to sleep; she sat on the floor, whining softly
in her misery. One of the bucks knocked gently on the glass door with
his antler. Eepersip turned; a smile crept over her face at the sight
of her beloved comrades. The buck, as softly as he could, broke one
of the glass doors, wood and all. Then the deer, all except the fawn,
bounded off to the field again.

The sound of breaking glass
reached the ears of Mr. Ikkisfield, who was awake, all too late; for
by the time he had wakened the others--which he did by shouting "Get
up! get up! Sounds like high doings out there!"--Eepersip, on the
little fawn's back, had vanished toward the field. The families, when
they got to the porch, found only the broken door. Though they heard
trampling hoofs, they knew that it would be of no use to follow.

The families, after that adventure, were desperate; and they decided
not to make any more plans just then, for winter was coming on rapidly,
but to stay at the house until the next summer.

As for
Eepersip, well, she was mighty glad to have got away unhurt. Happy
again, she was soon sound asleep in the woods on the edge of the field,
cuddled up underneath the doe which had saved her before. She wasn't
sure how to get along through the winter safely, but she had had such a
splendid summer that she knew it would be foolish to give up her wild
life now. She could manage somehow.

And so she did. She found
that her parents had left her own heavy winter coat in the place where
they had once found her sleeping; and this would be very helpful to
her, she thought. She was also glad to realize that her parents, much
though they wanted to get her back, didn't wish her to perish in the
cold of winter. "They _are_ nice people, after all!" she thought
to herself.

With the coat and the prospect of warmth, there
came a delightful idea into her head. On the edge of the meadow there
was an old dilapidated fox-hole. It was very large already; and after
about ten days of hard work Eepersip found that the passages could be
made exactly large enough for her to crawl into. The earth was so loose
and mouldy that it came away without difficulty. She crept down the
tunnel a long way, digging as she went. Presently she came to a snug
bedroom about five feet square and four and a half high, which was a
little less than her own height. But she did not mind stooping, as long
as she had this cunning room; besides, she could dig away the ceiling
if she wanted to. The room was old and dirty, but Eepersip lined it
entirely with grass. Digging around, in one corner she came upon a
little packet made of leaves. Inside it were a few cordary-berries
seeds![1] She wondered who had made this packet--who had lived in this
burrow before her. A person, of that she was sure. These seeds had not by any
means rotted; they were still as moist and sweet as ever, and Eepersip rejoiced
to them. Digging around some more, she discovered a small square block of
wood. Lifting it up, she found great heaps of milkweed pods, kept from
springing open by the pressure of the earth against them. She rejoiced
in this too. There was enough of the milkweed to make a bed for
herself. She covered the bed with her old dress, which she had kept all
this time in case she should need it. Never was such a soft bed seen.
In the burrow she also built several shelves of boards, and on these
she heaped up more cordary berries and their seeds, which were just
beginning to come.

[1] The cordary berry grows during
the winter and is at its best at New Year. The seeds have sweet meats.
The berries are bright red, and the seeds dark purple, running over
inside with sweet juice which keeps the kernel moist.

The next day was the last of November. In the
morning Eepersip, after a long sleep in the burrow, woke up to find the
world white with the first snow. The entrance of the tunnel was placed
at such an angle that never a flake found its way down in. Eepersip
was delighted; she danced and skipped about, with the chipmunk at her
heels.

The next day it stopped snowing, and the sun came out,
shining dimly. Every snow-crystal sparkled like a diamond. Eepersip and
the chipmunk dashed across the meadow and looked far, far down. Though
ordinary eyes could not have seen to the end of this mass of glittering
whiteness, Eepersip's could, and beyond all the icicles and snowflakes
she saw the river calmly shining, blue as the sky. In its rippling
surface Eepersip could see the very reflection of the sun breaking out
through a cloud. The meadow was beautiful even when the sun was dim,
but nothing to what it was now!

Eepersip could see every colour
of the rainbow reflected in each crystal--orange, purple, green, blue,
red, and many, many iridescent tints. Full of joy, she looked down upon
the river once more, through the glittering iridescence. The longer she
looked, the better she could see the river. But at last the sun went
in again; it had been out hardly long enough to melt one snowflake.
Everywhere round Eepersip went the chipmunk's little footprints, for
he had shared her delight. At last, when Eepersip wanted to go back
to her subterranean shelter, the chipmunk hung back and whimpered.
Eepersip saw that he wanted to stay; and knowing that he could find
his way, she left him behind and went back to the burrow herself.

But he didn't come back. She waited and waited and often called,
but he did not appear. "What can have happened to my little friend?"
she thought. At last she set out to look for him, calling as she went.
She looked in every crevice, to see whether something had frightened
him and he had plunged into some hiding-place. But she did not find
him. At last, whistling and calling, she came near to where she had
left him, on the edge of the meadow. Then what did she see in the snow
but footprints--human footprints! Chippy's little tracks had started
back in the direction of the burrow, but the strange footprints came
towards his and overtook them--and at that point his suddenly left
off. Then she discovered the others going down the hill again. It was
only too clear--Chippy had been captured!

Eepersip sat down
in the snow and wept. But suddenly she straightened up and became
herself again. Why not follow those footprints down the hill and get
her Chippy back? With a hopeful heart she dashed down, following the
tracks. But she came into a small village, where she was afraid of
being caught. She could not go on; so she went back.

Another
idea! Why not follow the footprints some night, when there were not
so many people around, and when, even if there were, she would not be
seen so easily? But there was the question of being able to see the
footprints in the dark. No, that would be impossible: the only thing to
do would be to wait. For what, Eepersip had not the slightest idea.

The name of the people who had captured the chipmunk was Brunio.
Mr. Brunio and his little twin daughters, Flitterveen and Caireen, had
come up to the meadow with sleds and skis to slide. They had seen the
chipmunk frolicking about, and had watched him impatiently.

"How
I would like that little animal for my own!" said Flitterveen.

"He looks cold and hungry, Father," said Caireen. "Here, I have
some crackers in my pocket. Let us throw them to him and see if he
will eat them."

This they had done, and the chipmunk had been
tempted. He had come up cautiously and nibbled at them. He loved
Eepersip dearly. He had never received harm from one of those queer
two-legged creatures. He trusted them. But, while he had been nibbling,
Mr. Brunio had sneaked up quietly and taken him. Thus he had been
captured.

Eepersip was not able to free her little friend
until the next spring. She had lived a rather lonely life without him
through the winter, and one morning very early she decided to make a
desperate attempt to rescue him. She went down the slope of the hill
to the river, through grass wet with pearly dew-drops. She stole along
the bank of the river. behind bushes as much as possible, so as not to
be seen. Finally she came to a little wooden bridge, and across this
she went. But from there she had no idea how to proceed. She looked
all about her, bewildered, afraid among so many houses.

It was
a heavenly morning. The sun rose and cast a sweet golden light over
the earth. The grass sparkled as if with diamonds. A fresh spring
breeze was blowing gently. Flowers grew here in the deep grass, and
myriads of butterflies came flocking. But Eepersip stood forlorn and
discouraged.

Suddenly a faint squeaking came to her. She darted
toward the sound. O Eepersip, beware--not too fast! The squeaking came
from one side of a dark brown house. Eepersip saw a small wire cage,
and in it her little brown Chippy. Mr. Brunio had opened the squeaky
door of the house and was coming out with Chippy's food. Eepersip saw
him, and swerved aside into the shelter of a gigantic rose-bush before
he saw her--just in the nick of time. It seemed like a long wait, but
after a while Mr. Brunio went into the house again.

Looking
cautiously about her, Eepersip tiptoed out, opened the door of the
cage, seized Chippy, id sped off. Thus he was rescued; and Eepersip
was happy indeed!

As for the Brunios, they were very much
distressed when they found out that the chipmunk was gone. By spying,
they discovered some of Eepersip's strange habits. Then, early one
morning, they took their little kitten--the twins had rather stupidly
named her "White," for her colour--up to the field where Eepersip had
her home, let her go very near Eepersip's burrow, and then ran away
quickly before the kitten could find them. Well, White didn't care much
about being left in the dewy grass, bewilderedly shaking first one
paw, then another. But presently Eepersip came out of her burrow with
Chippy. Seeing the patch of white, Eepersip thought the kitten was an
exceptionally late bit of snow left on the grass. But no, it certainly
had not been there the last time she had looked. And then she realized
that it was altogether too late for any snow. Darting up to it, she
found the little kitten, so snow-white, with the blue-grey eyes like
little moonstones, gazing pitifully up at her. Because she thought the
kitten had been a patch of snow, Eepersip named her Snow-flake.

She took her, shivering with the wetness of the dew, into her
burrow, and found, much to her surprise, that Chippy recognized her
and sprang at her in great delight. The truth of the matter was that
Chippy had often seen the kitten during his captivity, and had played
many a happy game with her in his cage.

Caireen and Flitterveen
had thought when they let the kitten go that Eepersip, seeing a new
animal, would give them back Chippy. Not so! Eepersip would rather have
two animals than one. Besides, she saw how dearly the two loved each
other, and would not have parted them for anything now. The Brunios had
been disappointed enough at losing Chippy--and now they had lost the
kitten too!

It was now summer, and the Brunios--Mr. Brunio,
Caireen, and Flitterveen--decided to climb Eiki-ennern Peak and try to
get back their kitten. They wandered around a little while and at last
came to a sunny place on the edge of the woods. It was a very grassy
spot, all surrounded with blackberry-bushes just blossoming. Near its
edge was Chippy asleep, and in the middle was Snowflake washing herself
and playing with the dry oak-leaves that swirled about in the breeze.
Snowflake started back a little at the sound of whispering voices,
and then looked up. Eepersip was not there, for she had gone off to
find some sweet bulbs and roots

"Come on, White, dear!" called
Caireen.

But Snowflake did not know her old name since Eepersip
had changed it.

"Here, Sugar-bowl!" said Mr. Brunio. (He had
got rather used to calling her that, because she loved sugar and had
a habit of pawing into the sugar-bowl to get it). This was a trifle
more familiar, and she took a step forward.

"That's the way!"
said Flitterveen, encouraging her. "Come on!"

Snowflake took
back the step.

They grew impatient; yet some of their calls were
encouraging that Snowflake could hardly resist creeping through the
briers to their feet. Pretty soon she touched Chippy with her nose. He
awoke, yawned two or three times, and, when he saw the people there,
instantly pattered off into the woods. Now Snowflake sat very still,
in spite of all their coaxings, for she knew that help was coming. And
she didn't have long to wait, for in a moment Eepersip came running up
with Chippy in her arms. With a beautiful leap she cleared the briers
and, taking up Snowflake, cleared them again and vanished into the
woods.

Life for Chippy and Snowflake was great fun during the
time when Mr. Brunio, sometimes with the twins, was coming up to the
brier-patch and trying to entice Snowflake away. In the afternoons,
though the two little animals were glad to stay in the brier-patch,
Eepersip generally took them along with her when she went anywhere, for
she thought that possibly Mr. Brunio might come up with an ax to chop
down the briers. In this Eepersip proved wise, for, about the third day
that Mr. Brunio and the children had been coming up Eiki-ennern Peak to
rescue Snowflake, Mr. Brunio did bring an ax. But this time Eepersip
had taken the two little animals out with her; they had gone exploring,
finding sweet roots and brilliant berries.

Eepersip spent that
summer in continual fits of dancing, laughing, and merriment. She had
never before been so happy. Every day she felt as though she loved
the animals, birds, and butterflies--everything of Nature--more
than the day before. She loved to see the same birds coming back this
year. Above all she loved the delicate butterflies with wings of all
colours. She would lie in the meadow for hours and watch what was
happening. She could imagine miniature cities in the air, and saw
little butterflies and birds constantly going and coming from them.
There were cities on the ground too, where orchestras of grasshoppers
and crickets played in the grass.

She sometimes made up words
for her melodies--little songs of Nature. She would sing them over
and over, sometimes ringingly, sometimes in a murmur.

Buttercups are smiling
To see the butterflies
Feathering
so softly,
Rainbowing the skies.... 

The wind is snowing butterflies,
Fairy golden showers;
Misty the air with dancing wings;
The sun is raining flowers.

She told the deer that _she_ felt like a butterfly, and that the wind was
snowing _her_ when she danced. And then she gave them handfuls of lush grass.

At the end of that first winter Mrs. Eigleen
began to feel ill. No one knew what was the matter with her. She spent
the spring in continual weeping and hysterics. Towards the summer she
began to feel seriously ill. They had had several different doctors in
to see her, but none of them could find out exactly what the matter
was, for she refused to tell anyone anything, even though she said she
herself knew. One afternoon she called her friends round her and bade
them take her over to the meadow, where they would surely see Eepersip.
They took her out, but never a trace of Eepersip did they see. And Mrs.
Eigleen kept on having her fits of weeping all through the summer, even
more frequently than before.

Now, by this time Mrs. Eigleen, her
husband, and all her neighbours had found out that Eepersip had taken
White away from the Brunios; for once they had been out in the field
and seen Eepersip. She was crowned with a wreath on which butterflies
were clustering in bunches, like grapes; and Chippy and Snowflake were
frolicking about her. The Eigleens, the Ikkisfields, and the Wraspanes
went down the meadow and to Mr. Brunio's house (for some of them knew
the Brunios and recognized the kitten), and he related his adventures.
That very afternoon they went back to the meadow and chased Eepersip,
but they couldn't catch her, for she took up Snowflake and Chippy and
mounted a doe, who bore them off like the wind.

The next day
they tried again: It was dawn, and Eepersip was lying in the centre
of the meadow with Snowflake and Chippy by her side. She had had her
breakfast, but she lay on the grass watching the sun rise and send away
the shadows to right and left, flushing the sky with delicate pink
and yellow. The deer were still laying down. Eepersip heard a sound
of voices talking, followed by a roar of laughter; and instantly, of
course, she grew suspicious. She heard: "Mr. Wraspane, will you come
with me?" "Certainly, Mr. Eigleen." "Mrs. Ikkisfield, you come with
me. We are the ones that are not so skilled in slyness. We will go up
on the hill and guard there." "All right, Mrs. Eigleen."

As Eepersip lay there in the field, two men broke out of the woods right
near where she was lying. She sprang to her feet, caught Chippy and
Snowflake in her arms, and ran. Before she could snatch up the two
little animals, Mr. Eigleen was just able to seize her dress as she
darted by him. But, of course, the fern that he caught hold of came
out in his hand, and she ran along toward the hill--a foolish thing
to do, for she had just heard that there were two people guarding it.
Still, that was just about the only thing that she could do, for the
other two, Mr. Ikkisfield and Mrs. Wraspane, had also come out of the
woods and blocked her path.

Eepersip fled up on the hill and
nearly ran into Mrs. Eigleen and Mrs. Ikkisfield. Mrs. Eigleen caught
hold of Snowflake's tail, and Mrs. Ikkisfield stepped in front of
Eepersip, who dodged desperately to one side, releasing her hold on
the kitten to prevent its being injured.

But Eepersip was not
going to give up her pet just yet. She sped down the hill, knowing
that the others would soon be going to give the kitten back to the
Brunios. Through the big field she ran, with Chippy clinging to her
hair--down the other side of the slope to the river, along its banks,
across the small bridge 'way down, and back to Mr. Brunio's house on
the other side.

Eepersip looked all about her for some place of
concealment. No one was in sight. Along the side of the house there
was a forest of blackberry-bushes, which extended several yards and
was unusually dense and towering. The luscious black-and-purple fruit
was ripening, making it look even more sheltering and mysterious.
This patch was in such a position that it had to be passed to the
front door, which was really on the side of the house. Eepersip was
pleased to find such a convenient place. She sampled the berries with
satisfaction, always taking pains to see that no one was coming. Then
she wriggled inside and waited.

Presently they all came along,
Mrs. Ikkisfield holding Snowflake. Eepersip had ready in her hand a
little sharp-pointed stick. She pushed it through a tiny hole in Mrs.
Ikkisfield's stocking. It hurt! Mrs. Ikkisfield gave a little shriek
of pain and dropped Snowflake, who instantly put her paw on a small
fern which she saw--she couldn't see Eepersip, but the fern was very
familiar!--and was pulled by Eepersip into the bush. When the people
saw that, they knew, of course, who was near.

Eepersip started to crawl through the bush and out the other side; but
she heard Mr. Eigleen whispering to the others to go around and stop her. While
they were watching, Mr. Brunio, who had joined them, went back into the
house and fetched a net. It was woven of coarse, thick ropes, but the
meshes were quite small enough to hold the kitten, and almost Chippy
himself. (Mr. Brunio had once been a fisherman; he had retired, but
he still had many nets with meshes of various sizes.) They put this
net over the bush and pegged it down firmly, driving the pegs with the
head of an ax which Mr. Brunio brought out. Then they retreated to a
distance and watched.

Eepersip began working at the pegs; and
the chipmunk and the kitten to dig at the base of each so that she
might be able to pull them up more easily. The pegs were really too
big for Eepersip's little hands to manage comfortably, but she didn't
think of comfort in such danger as this, and she worked boldly at the
pegs with her nimble fingers. After she had got two or three up, the
Eigleens and their friends came forward, took those pegs, and put
them down more firmly than before, so that Eepersip had to begin all
over.

Although the people who were trying to capture Eepersip
and the kitten were naturally becoming very hungry, they didn't like
to leave the bush unguarded. But Mr. Brunio (who was exceptionally
hungry) said that he had many more such nets, and that they could
spread them all over the bush and hurriedly get luncheon. If they
put them down very firmly, and ate rather fast, there wouldn't be
much chance of Eepersip's escaping before they could get out again.
So they spread four more nets over the bush and went in.

Now
was Eepersip's chance, and she worked harder than ever. At last, with
the aid of Chippy and Snowflake, who helped a lot by digging around
the pegs, Eepersip got out of the first net and began tugging at the
second. She didn't try to dig up the pegs of this one: instead, all
three tried to dig under it, and at last they had made a hole large
enough for Eepersip to crawl through. The fibres of the third net
were rather rotten, so that Eepersip tore it easily. Each peg of the
fourth and fifth nets came up at one mighty yank; Mr. Brunio and his
helpers had put the last nets down in a great hurry, in order to get
their luncheon. Then Eepersip, with the two little animals, fled from
that dread place, across the bridge and back to the meadow, where
she found a sheltered spot and slept.

The three families
were much disgusted with themselves for not catching Eepersip and the
kitten; but they promised Mr. Brunio that they would try again. There
followed a week of rainy weather, during which they made no attempts,
but laid plans. As soon as the weather cleared, they tried one of
these plans; and Snowflake had a narrow escape.

It was in the
middle of the night. The families found Eepersip, with the two little
animals, asleep on the meadow. They took the kitten from her arms.
But as they did so, Eepersip herself woke up, screamed loudly, and
rushed after them. Then they turned and came after her; and Eepersip
was bold enough and angry enough not to run until she had rescued
Snowflake. She came right up to her parents and seized Snowflake from
the arms of the horrified Mrs. Eigleen. Then Eepersip ran--and fast,
too!

When she came to the edge of the woods she made straight
for a great pine. This tree she had climbed about in often, and she
knew its every limb. In pitch dark she could find all its branches,
and sometimes she trusted to her memory rather recklessly. She was as
sure of this tree as of the ground, even at night. She loved it--she
called it _her_ tree. A tree was, perhaps, not the easiest place
of concealment, but Eepersip thought that in this way she would not
have to run all over the meadow in the dark--and she was very tired
after her usual all-day playing.

There were no branches lower
than seven feet up. Eepersip made one leap, caught hold of a branch,
and swung herself up on to it. From that branch she mounted higher and
higher until she reached the very top. It swayed gloriously, even under
her light weight, but it didn't creak as if about to break. She sat up
in the high crotch and looked at the people so far below, through a
mass of black needles and a mighty thickness of strong limbs. It was
a wonderful night. The sky was spangled with stars of vivid silver.
Not a cloud was to be seen except on the western horizon, where a bank
was piling up rapidly, silhouetted against the deep ultramarine of the
sky, across which the Milky Way made a path of radiance. Eepersip,
looking down among the powerful limbs, felt as if she were part of
the familiar tree.

Poor Chippy and Snowflake were tired and
sleepy after what they had just been through. Eepersip murmured kind
words to them, while she thought of all that she had been through
herself. She was not in the least dizzy, but she was tired, and she
knew that she must not go to sleep up there.

Then she saw
that Mr. Eigleen had started to climb the great tree. He got about
half-way up and then stopped. She remembered the place: it had been
difficult for her, too. There was not a limb where he could put out a
foot and step on it; the next one was at the level of his neck. The
question was, how could he get on to this limb? He didn't have the
strength to pull himself up to it the way Eepersip had done. He tried
for a long time; but his caution proved too much for him. At last,
in despair, he descended; and the people went away, leaving Eepersip
in peace.

As soon as they were well out of sight and hearing,
Eepersip came down in a series of leaps from limb to limb. At length
she got to the bottom, where the last limb was seven feet from the
ground. She braced herself as firmly as she could on this, and then
she jumped. It was a marvellous jump in the dark, and she landed on
the ground unhurt, though very tired and covered with bits of bark.
"My, that was a dreary adventure!" she said sleepily, as she crawled
off to find a place to sleep

Eepersip saw no more of the
Brunios or her parents, and she decided that they had given up chasing
her and Snowflake for the winter--a winter which she and her two
friends spent undisturbed, playing with the leaves and shadows.

It was spring--spring before the third summer that Eepersip was
to spend wild--and the golden sun melted away the last patches of
snow from off the bare rocks and from round the pool, where it had
lodged between them. It was warm, although a wind was blowing--the
delicious wind of spring. This marvellous spring air made her blood
course quickly. She felt extremely happy and dancy. Her body seemed
to her lighter than ever, in spite of its strength. Her spirit was so
joyous that she could not express it in action; she had to let part
of it out in song. But song, however light and happy, could not quite
express Eepersip's feeling. She danced, and she sang, and she leaped
aloft for joy.

As the season advanced, she crowned herself with
sweet-smelling flowers, and the butterflies came and lit on them. She
went up the pool wearing her fluttering crown, and there she saw the
flowers that had come to bloom. There was iris, purple and gold--huge
blossoms which reminded Eepersip of the ocean as she had seen it, so
far away, on the first day of her wandering. In a soft bed of green
moss she found a little pink-and-white flower that she didn't know,
bell-shaped and very fragrant. There were wild-rose-buds there, too,
and never had Eepersip seen so many butterflies as were on those roses.
They bordered the tiny beach, mingled with the tenderly uncurling
green ferns. The delicate red leaf-buds on the maple-trees were now
developing into tiny emerald leaves. And there were ever so many
other treasures of Nature there.

Eepersip played little happy
games with all the creatures of the field. One game she played with
the crickets. A cricket would be hiding in a certain place, and when
Eepersip danced by he would buzz out of the grass into her face; she
would pretend to be startled and would run from the spot. She played
another game with the grasshoppers. One would be hiding, and Eepersip
would come dancing by with her eyes shut. Then the grasshopper would
whirr out of the grass and alight on her hand. When she opened her eyes
she would shake her hand and try to get rid of him, all in fun, of
course. Then sh e played two lovely games with the happy butterflies.
She would let a butterfly alight on her hand, to which she would then
give a violent jerk, so that the butterfly was sent sailing into the
air; then, without a motion of the wings, he would come sailing back to
Eepersip's hand. This they would do again and again. When she tired of
this game, Eepersip would crown herself with the sweetest flowers she
could find, and then flocks of butterflies would try to alight on her
wreath as she danced. There were never enough flowers for all of them;
some were always fluttering around Eepersip's head, trying to find a
nestling-place, and others were safely folded in the blossoms.

One of the thrilling hours of Eepersip's happy life that summer
was when she lay in the meadow watching the sky and all the swallows
circling. Snowflake and Chippy were frolicking gayly in the short, dry
grass, chasing leaves. Now Chippy snuggled up to Eepersip. Snowflake
kept on playing; she was crouched on her little white belly, playing
with a dry brown leaf, and when it drifted beyond her reach she would
spring after it. Eepersip watched her in a dreamy way. Now Snowflake
cast the dead leaf away, having torn it to shreds, and played with
other things. Sometimes she would rear herself up into the air; at
other times she would run with little tripping steps over to Eepersip,
as if something had frightened her; again she would rush round and
round Eepersip in a wide circle, and finally she would settle down to
play with another dead leaf. It made Eepersip glad to hear the kitten's
little pattering feet on the grass; she knew how madly Snowflake was
frolicking, but she did not share in the play--instead, with a dreamy
happiness, she watched the sky.

Another day in this summer
was even happier. It was in July, and Eepersip was lying in a part
of the meadow where there weren't many deer, so that the grass was
long, soft, and green instead of stiff and short. Snowflake and Chippy
were frolicking around in it, but again Eepersip was not thinking of
them. She wast thinking the swallows that flew over her, and the way
the sun shone on their breasts, making them glitter like silver. The
crickets were chirping, and the grasshoppers were accompanying them,
and they were both very happy. The frogs croaked bass songs from the
pool--the cool, green frogs! The birds were singing merrily, and the
butterflies passed over Eepersip's head in flocks--butterflies of
white and purple and blue and yellow, little ones of copper-green, and
big ones of orange and red. Some of them flew with short, quick flirts
of the wings, others with long strokes which swept them through the
air. The gauzy dragonflies, too, flew over her. Everything thrilled
Eepersip's happy, tireless eyes.

The bees hummed their way low
over the long green grass, and Chippy and Snowflake leaped high in the
air when they passed. Eepersip had taught the two little animals not
to catch the creatures of the field, and before long all the birds
loved Snowflake--something that few kittens have yet attained. But
Snowflake and Chippy liked to pretend to catch the bees, and sometimes
they went so far as to hold them: on the ground with their paws, very
gently, not hurting them at all. Snowflake and Chippy lay in the
grass, reaching and touching anything that took their fancy. When the
wind blew they would leap up at the clover-blossoms that nodded. They
played hide-and-seek, leaping over the grasses and chasing each other
in and out of their hiding-places. The long grass offered a splendid
place of concealment. Chippy would scurry behind a big sheltering tuft,
seeming to Snowflake to have vanished in mid-air. Snowflake would poke
about and run in such bewildering circles that it tired them looking
at each other. Soon they would get so mixed up that they wouldn't know
which of them was supposed to be hiding, and it often happened that
they were both hiding at the same time, or both searching.

This
was for Eepersip the happiest of that summer's hours in the field.
Something fresh and fragrant in the air made breathing a delight; it
almost lifted her off the ground, and she let forth a glorious burst of
song.

It was a cold, frisky day in October, and Eepersip,
even in her warm coat, had to keep moving. Snowflake and Chippy were
frolicking and playing games with each other. Eepersip had taught them
how to shake hands, and this they were practising. A leaf had settled
on Snowflake's head like a brown crown, and she was trying vigorously
to get it off. But no, the leaf was curled firmly around her small,
dainty ears. She got wilder and wilder in her amusing efforts. She
dashed round and round. She reached after it with her forepaws. All in
vain! She could not get rid of that persistent leaf. But there! a gust
of cold wind sent it flying from her head, to be instantly lost in a
whirl of others which the wind had started up. Snowflake dashed among
them madly, and played with them, trying to catch them all at the same
time. But at last she stopped her foolish efforts and came quietly back
to rest.

In November the first snow of the winter fell. The
flakes came thick and fast, like white and silver butterflies dancing,
flying. Eepersip took them in her hands and noticed how each flake had
its own shape, which was never found again. During that day in October
Snowflake had worn a brown crown of a dead leaf, but now she wore a
white one. The snow didn't show much on the white fur of the kitten,
but Chippy's autumn brown was soon covered with a mossy blanket of
it. The flakes whirled down thicker and faster than ever, and Chippy
tried to jump at them all. The playmates could hide in the snow now,
for if they got far enough apart they couldn't see each other. They
tried to capture the snowflakes, but they found that this made their
paws even wetter.

In spite of all this merriment, Eepersip had
a slightly sad feeling in her heart. The night before, she had seen
the sea; and it had looked _so_ glorious that she felt as if--as
if she would like to go to it. She loved the meadow so much that this
would be almost impossible for her. Yet she knew that, in spite of
her love for the meadow. her longing for the sea would grow, and that
one day she must leave her present home. All this made her rather
sad. But she tried to be happy--to share the joy of her two little
friends, and the joy of having the little fairy things come whirling
down upon her. She played all day in the meadow with her friends, and
when the evening fell they went back to the burrow and slept in peace
till morning.

In this way the winter passed. Every evening at
sunset Eepersip would go over to the edge of the meadow and gaze long
upon the sea, with the brilliant sunset colours reflected in it. And
each time she looked it seemed so beautiful, so beautiful! and each
time she tried to go to it, it seemed as if the ground of the meadow
was a great magnet to her feet.

The spring came, and with it
the flowers and leaves.

One night Eepersip woke up to find the
full moon as if hanging in the sky. A few faint stars could be seen.
She tried to go to sleep, but could not. At last she got up from her
bed of moss. The dew lay thick on the grass, which slushed deliciously
against her bare feet. All entranced with the beauty of the night,
she ran lightly over to the spot where she often had a view of the
sea. And she beheld it with the full moon reflected in it--a globe
of soft silver, shimmering and quivering in the unstill waters. This
time it was too much for Eepersip. She could stand it no longer--her
heart gave way. She decided that the next morning she would satisfy
her longing.

And so, just after dawn, she left her beautiful
home in the field and journeyed toward the ocean. She went to the edge
of the meadow with a herd of deer daintily tripping after her. She
turned and cried: "Good-bye, O deer! for probably I shall never see you
again." She kissed the ground of the meadow, and she wept to think that
she was leaving it; but she knew that her love for the sea had become
greater than her love for the meadow. And then she went away--sadly,
yet happy at the prospect of a new and beautiful life by the foaming,
churning rocks and the white-capped waves.



II
THE SEA

Your flashing waves hold out their arms to me-- I
entangle myself in their silver hair,
And ride with them to catch the wind.
The sun trails bright jewels in the water,
And laughs because I cannot touch them.

As Eepersip journeyed on, the meadow grew dimmer in her mind, and the memory
of how the sea had looked grew brighter. She couldn't see it now, for she was
in a valley; but she knew that she was going in the right direction.
The spring breeze was blowing; it was not cold, and the breeze stirred
the air gently, so that it wasn't hot. Occasional whiffs from the
meadow came to Eepersip with that breeze; but when the had gone about
two miles this fragrance ceased.

That afternoon she came into a
great forest where strange, mysterious shadows passed back and forth in
a frightening way. She hurried on as fast as she could, but she had to
spend a night in it--one alarming, terrible night. The next day she
came out, torn and bedraggled with fighting her way through the dense
thickets. Several times she had to cross rivers--some of them without
a bridge, though luckily none of these was over her depth. Another day
had passed. Nightfall found her wearily climbing a very high hill.
The reflection of the moon showed her where the ocean was. It seemed
hardly any nearer than before! The third morning she descended into a
rich and fertile valley. A small brook was winding down it, and where
the weeping willows dipped into the current it bubbled and sang. This
valley was the broadest that Eepersip had yet gone through. But after
a long time she came out of it against a high, precipitous cliff. Up
the side of this she climbed, digging her toes into the cracks between
the rocks, At last she got to the top; and a long, weary climb it had
been. She was now on a grassy hill where bloomed daisies shining like
stars, and little butter-cups of gold. There were butterflies, too,
with brilliant wings, and they hovered and fluttered over the flowers.
And lo! there was the ocean, nearer now, with the sun shining on it;
and Eepersip could see the surf rolling and foaming. Shrill cries
pierced the air--the cries of birds, of seagulls swooping inland in
wide circles. And as went on through the waving grass she could smell
the delicious salt air of the sea.

But, alas, she met with a
hindrance. Between, her and the coast there was a valley extending
for miles, and poor Eepersip would have to clamber down a precipitous
cliff, through the valley, and up another cliff. Down she went, rather
unwillingly but knowing that she would get there sometime. At last she
came to the bottom. It wasn't so bad down there--there was a lovely
lakelet at which she refreshed herself with a drink; it was grassy,
and there were flowers. But it was stiflingly hot. There was a patch
of pine woods here and there, but it was hot even in the shade of
the great trees.

She stumbled on in the almost blinding heat,
clambering up the other great precipice--the wall of the valley. From
the top she looked down, and, seeing again that ponderous cliff, she
wondered how she could ever have got up it. Then she lay down on the
grass, and in a moment was asleep.

When she awoke, the strong
wind was blowing again. It made her almost fly through the cold, salty
air. Before her was the long-sought ocean, with the waves rolling
and the gulls swooping, diving and screaming. She flew; her feet
could not stay still. She was tired no longer--she didn't feel the
smallest effects of her wearisome journey.

Suddenly she heard a
sound--the magical sound of the waves as they crashed on the rocks.
In they would come, pounding, roaring, breaking upon the shore. The
foam and spume would fly back and leap up into the air. Everything
sounded strange--stranger than anything Eepersip had ever heard. No
words can describe what she imagined. She never had had such a lot of
emotions in her head at the same time. She tried to describe them to
herself, but soon gave it up as useless. She thought: "Here I am; I see
it; you don't need to tell me about it!" And then she realized that
she was alone, knowing in her own mind what it was like, yet unable to
stop wishing that she could describe the hollow, ringing sound. Was
she becoming homesick? No! it was sheer delight.

For a moment
she paused. Then she bounded through the yellow sand, and, ever going
faster and faster, she came to the edge of her sea. Her longing had
been fulfilled.

This beach was almost overhung at one end by a
great shelf of rock. The sand was glistening with shells of all colours
and bordered with sea-weeds washed up. Tiny sand-pipers' tracks ran
all over it. Eepersip stayed there a long time, gazing into the waves,
gazing at everything.

The rock-ledge at one end of the beach had
been catching her eye for some time. She watched how fearlessly the
gulls plunged on quivering wings, down, down, then rose again, covered
with silvery drops, to fly here and there. Then she would look back at
the little precipice. She thought: "_I_ cannot fly! _They_
do it from the air, but I cannot. I can do it from the precipice!
Why not? "Then, aloud: "I _will_ be a bird--I _will_ do
it!"

She walked back to the point where the cliff towered from
the beach. She climbed up. She selected, in the water so far below, a
place that was free from the treacherous-looking rocks. Then, swaying
her arms a moment and plucking up high courage, she gave a flying leap
and landed in the deep water.

Another miracle! She had never
had a chance to swim before, but somehow she did it naturally now. It
was an instinct in her to kick with her legs and throw out her arms in
the right way. Fortunately she had landed in the place without rocks.
Shaking herself in imitation of the gulls, so that silvery drops flew
from her in all directions, she began to swim about. She played in the
water for a time, entranced, singing as she had never done before,
even in the meadow. After a while she came out, all shining, laughing
and dancing. But it was then too late in the day to play any more; so
she lay down on the sand, well out of reach of the tide, and slept,
with the murmuring of the sea in her ears all night.

It
had been high tide; but the tide was now going out, and near the beach
the tops of the great rocks were appearing. To Eepersip, who had never
before been near the ocean, these things which happened every day were
strange and delightful, and she could not look at them enough. Each
wave was pure blue, topped and trimmed with spray. As the waters drew
back Eepersip had to retreat; for the low tide revealed more and more
rocks, and the spray that hit upon them flew back farther and farther.
Gradually they were left bare and dry, and Eepersip arranged sea-weeds
and sea-plants in the little pools left in their hollows. When, at
last, high tide came in, she sorrowed to watch them become part of the
sea again. But she knew, of course, that when the tide went out other
pools would be left--perhaps more than there had been before.

Among the rocks at the back of the beach Eepersip found a pool made
by leaping spray from a storm. She trimmed it with sea-weeds of brown
and green. She took some of the dried low-tide snails from the rocks
around it and cast them into the sea. With her hands she caught some
sluggish yet pretty little fishes and put them into her pool. As she
was doing this she noticed how the tide was coming in--she had been
so intent upon her task that she hadn't seen it. It was now almost
up to her. She stopped what she was doing and watched it anxiously,
afraid that it was going to reach her pool. But, to her great joy,
it didn't. The waves lapped as if they wanted it very much, but they
couldn't quite touch it; and Eepersip, worried no longer, continued her
happy playing.

In this way the days passed, with something new
all the time. But she did not forget her little pool. She tended it,
putting in fresh plants and rocks, and replacing a fish if it died.

She slept in a crevice in the rocks at the end of the beach. There
was a tunnel under the rocks that the water had cut; if she crept to
the farther end, no tide could reach her. There was a spring in the
pasture in back of the beach, about a hundred yards away, and there
Eepersip got her supply of fresh water. It made a merry brooklet which
ran bubbling down a small hill and into the sea. When it was stormy she
had a habit of merely snuggling under the rocks as far as she could
go, to watch the glistening white-caps and listen to the crashing
surf. But before she had seen many storms she stayed out when they
weren't too severe, and sometimes played about in the waves--and she
liked to be ducked.

In her explorations along the shore
one day Eepersip found a great raft, made from interlacing twigs and
plastered over with clay and pitch. Here and there great water-soaked
ropes bound it firmly. It had been washed up on the shore, and from a
long period in the sea, had become terribly slimy and water-logged.
Eepersip hauled it to the water to see if it would hold her weight, but
it sank immediately. So she let it dry off in the sun for a long time;
and at last, when it had become quite dry, she tried again. This time
it held her. It started drifting off to sea with her on it, but she
quickly slipped off and took it to shore again. A few days afterward
Eepersip found a board, about three feet long and broad enough to
serve perfectly as a paddle.

That was what she had wanted. She
hauled the raft out to her depth, climbed on to it, took the paddle,
and pushed off merrily.

Under strong strokes the water whirled
and rushed, and the raft pushed through it. Sometimes she came to a
sand-flat, and again to such a deep place that when she looked down all
she could see was menacing shadows. Once the raft came into a shoal of
carmine-coloured fishes with very long pointed fins. Of course, they
scattered in all directions as she came amongst them.

When she
had started it was dawn. By midday, with the help of a favourable wind,
she was out of sight of land. Then she saw that, if she were going to
get back to the beach by evening, she must hurry and use her remaining
daylight in that direction. So she turned about, with great difficulty
because of the wind, and then she started homeward. But everything
that had before been favourable was now against her; with her clumsy
craft she could make no headway, and the waves were rising higher all
the time. So she gave up, thinking that possibly the wind would soon
change or calm down altogether. But this did not happen.

She
was dashed about wildly, ever going farther from land, and seeing
nothing save the unlimited expanse of rough water. Yet, even in her
fright, she enjoyed it. She was not hurt at all, and she had only to
cling tight to the raft. The sensation of being so dashed about and
of riding up and down on the waves was glorious.

All the same,
when it began to grow darker, darker, the wind remaining steady, she
began to wish she had not ventured forth, but had stayed in shelter
and safety at her little beach. She had always had great fun watching
the storms, the high spray, the wind-tossed gulls; but now she saw
that she had wished for rather too much.

It became steadily
blacker, and still she was borne on, making no resistance now, for she
saw how useless it was. By the faint remaining light from where the
sun had set, she saw ahead of her a dark pointed object rising out of
the water. She knew that it was a rock; and, afraid of being dashed
against it, she began resisting with her paddle. Extreme fright made
her strokes powerful, and she actually managed to slow up the raft a
little. She came gently against the edge of the rock, fastened her
raft to it by means of one of the ropes, and climbed up to its peak.
From there, the sea, with its wild waves, was like the sky, full of
weird cloud-caves, fringed with light from a hidden moon.

She
looked for a long time; she looked steadily. And then, not far off,
she saw a dark mass which, outlined against the deep blue of the night
sky, appeared to be land--blessed land! She realized that the waves
were going straight toward it. With a cry of joy, she unfastened her
raft, leaped upon it, gave a useless push with her paddle, and went
on.

Soon she came to the shore--a smooth beach. She pulled up
her raft, well out of reach of the advancing tide, and started for
the bushes to find a place to sleep. For the first time since night
had fallen, she noticed the wondrous beauty of the moon, almost full,
and the stars that showed faintly their silvery faces. She crawled in
among the bushes, and, watching all these lovely things and listening
to the soft murmuring of the waves, which were now calm again, she
fell into a deep, delicious sleep.

The next day the sea
was absolutely calm. The sun was shining brilliantly on the water,
making it dance and sparkle. Even Eepersip, who was so accustomed to
waking in a different place from where she had been yesterday, was
surprised to find herself where she was, and she had to rub her eyes
hard to make sure that she was not dreaming. Then the whole adventure
came back to her--the raft, the windy night, the raging sea, and the
happy landing on this shore. There was her raft, lying on the beach
just where she had left it.

She got up and started to explore
along the beach, but suddenly she stopped short in her tracks; for
there, covered with climbing vines and bordered with bright little
flowers, was a cottage--a little cottage in the midst of its forest
of green leaves and bushes. Beautiful though it was, for a moment
tears came to Eepersip's eyes. Exactly so had her own cottage looked;
through all these years she had remembered it--just how it was in
every detail. But this recollection soon passed away, in the dismay
of realizing that she had come to an inhabited place. It was all so
beautiful--she had wanted to stay and explore--and her hopes were
crushed!

She stood stock-still for a long time, looking at the
cottage. Nothing stirred within. Everything was quiet--oh! so quiet.
Stealthily as a mouse Eepersip crept toward it, opened the door, and
went in. A house, a detested house!--one of those houses that she had
run away from. Everything came back to her--those foolish coverings
on the floors which they called carpets, at the windows those useless
decorations called curtains. To think of it! when there was a carpet so
much lovelier of green grass or of white sand--and no windows to be
curtained!

It was a delightful little room, all the same; with a
brownish woolly carpet, a small fireplace, and little blue curtains of
a delicate material. It was quite deserted, so she decided not to let
it bother her.

A small back door opened into the lovely woods at
the back of the house. Quickly Eepersip made her way out into the open;
and everything looked twice as lovely as before. How light it was,
with all the world a window, instead of those silly little peep-holes
fringed about! How much more glowing everything was! Oh, nothing in a
house could compare with the world of light that Eepersip lived in!

Out here, the sunbeams made shadows wherever they struck; the birds
twittered; the ripples lapped the shore caressingly. Otherwise all
was still. But she was not thinking of the sea: she had decided to
explore the woodland, for she felt, in a way, that it was her home.
Following a little winding path, she came through a grove of white
pines carpeted with needles and dotted with gnome-like toadstools of
red and yellow, looking very bright and mysterious in that shady place.
They were, to Eepersip, like the traces of some elfin revel, perhaps
thrones of precious mineral. There were great boulders, too, covered
with grey-green lichens some bearing aloft tiny cup-like blossoms
of pearly grey--the cups from which the feasters had drunk their
flower-wine. Seeing a lighter place ahead, she knew that she was coming
out of the pine grove. A flood of pale green radiance greeted her, as
she stepped out of the dimness of the woods into a meadow. White and
yellow butterflies were fluttering over it in great flocks, with wings
shining. Eepersip could hear birds chirping and singing. She passed
on through the meadow and came again into woodlands, so thick now
that hardly a sunbeam could penetrate the dense canopy of leaves.

After a while she emerged into a clearing. In the middle of it there
was a pool, almost entirely surrounded with dark green moss, very soft,
overhung by a boulder. It, too, had a covering of moss. A tiny stream
flowed silently and mysteriously into the pool, which was so dark that
Eepersip could just see its floor of dark sand. On the bottom grew
strange star-leaved plants, and small fishes were nibbling them. It was
all very strange and magical, it was so silent.

Eepersip stayed
looking at this pool for a long time, and then she decided to follow
the little brook which was trickling into it and see where it came
from. She followed it through deep woodland for about three miles. All
this way it was sluggish. Then the land changed abruptly; and Eepersip
realized that she was climbing a steep and rugged hill. She went up and
up on a rough path. It was very hard climbing, and she was becoming
tired. At last she got to the top, and her happy eye looked back upon
the way she had come.

She saw from that high perch the pool,
into which she knew the little brook was trickling; the blotches which
were clumps and patches of dark forest; the field, a mass of sparkling
green light, a brilliant illumination to the gloomy pine forests around
it; the cottage, a tiny brown speck in the distance--and the sea, the
billowing sea, with the spots of foam, the towering waves, and that
green colour which the waves show when they are agitated. She could
even see the gulls, no bigger than flies to her, swooping about; but
she was too far away to hear their shrill, excited screams. Long and
steadily she looked. And then--the strangest thought Eepersip had ever
experienced came to her happy mind. "Forgetfulness!" she whispered to
herself. "Oh, I loved it so! and then, when it happened that I came
to the woodlands again, why--I forgot it. I must go back instantly.
But I am _so_ tired!" 

Each wave seemed to bring a pain
to Eepersip's heart, as she watched the sea, like emerald, stretching
away until it seemed to meet the blue sky. Suddenly she sprang to her
feet and started down like a wild deer. Tearing through the woodlands,
through the dense thickets and the brambles, she came out at last by
the pool. But she had no eye for all its beauties; she had no mind
but for the sea. She rested a second; then she was on her feet again,
plunging, rearing, fighting her way through the woods. She came again,
in the depths of exhaustion, into that pool of light, the meadow.
Unable to move, she sank down in the delicious soft grass and watched
the butterflies, like winged jewels, swooping above. Then she fell into
a deep, heavy slumber.

She was awakened by shrill cries which
pierced the air. Looking up, she saw a flock of gulls with their long,
narrow wings, the colour of foam, winging their way toward the sea.
Then she remembered that she, too, was supposed to be winging her way
toward the sea, and she cried: "O happy birds, I would I were among
you, to go with such flashing speed!" It seemed to her that the sea was
in her care, and that she, through foolish forgetfulness, had wandered
off from it--wandered off from her guarding, leaving it to the mercy
of the beasts. Of course, if she had thought a moment she would have
seen how out of proportion this was, but she could do nothing but blame
herself, and fancy a terrible monster who would come and drink it all
up in her absence. And she began fighting and struggling against her
tiredness, until, with one desperate effort, she managed to start
running again. Then there was no stopping! Her old strength seemed to
come back, the strength which she had had before starting her woodland
explorations--the result, as she thought now, of a foolish desire.
Once she had started running again, her feet winged with a great
longing, she sped along the ground.

Soon she passed the cottage;
and then--there was her sea again, just as she had left it, with the
waves beating the sandy shore. The gulls were screaming and diving;
everything was excited and trembling. With a cry of ecstasy, Eepersip
sprang into the waves

Many happy days Eepersip spent here,
living in the vicinity of the hated little cottage. Since she had come
from the sea she had worn a mermaid dress of sea-weeds, fastened at the
neck by a white shell with a hole through it. Her favourite play was
with the waves. She could swim now, even under water, with a speed that
surprised herself, and she dived gracefully from all the rocks that
she came upon. But it was watching the sea that fascinated her more
than anything else. She would sit for hours at a time on the rocks and
listen to the waves bellowing beneath her. Sometimes, when they were
very high, she would go down on the low rocks and shout with delight
when the white spray rushed along and whirled itself up into her face.
The waves would wash her over and over and play with her in their
salty hands, and, though they seemed rough and wild, something always
guided her away from the treacherous rocks which they headed for.

But she was born to wander, and it was not long before she was
off on her explorations again. One sparkling day when the sun danced
and glimmered on the little ripples, Eepersip started to explore the
shore-line. Every sun-sparkle made her feel happier and happier, and
every breath of salty air lighter, until at last she thought she must
rise up into the air on strong wings. After exploring quite a while
and finding nothing unusual, she sat down on a rock. Her auburn curls
goldened in the sunlight, and her brown eyes sparkled.

After she
had rested a while, watching the swooping sea-gulls, she decided to
collect shells. She went along the beach some way, picking up shells
and pebbles. But soon she tired of this and, feeling very hot, flung
herself into the sea and played a while in the shallow water. Soon she
thought that she would like to take a long swim, and she started out
rapidly.

The waves came in higher and higher and brought with
them great flocks of gulls sweeping around in wide graceful circles
and uttering strange wild cries. Eepersip went on a long way until she
saw a great rock ahead, draped with sea-weeds of a dark green which
were floating up and down with the motion of the waves. There were many
crabs and snails caught in them. She was borne forward to the rock in a
mighty wave, and, clinging to it hard, she waited until the wave drew
back before climbing up. After she had rested some time she noticed
a shoal of shining little fishes down in the water. Some were gold,
some silver, and some had bands of dark blue. They all had ruby eyes.
She watched them for a long time, lying on her stomach on the rock.
She observed how they nosed down and fed on the oozy sea-plants on the
bottom, which were covered with silver oxygen-bubbles. Also she could
see, 'way down there, lovely bright corals of all colours. The water
was rather muddy, but there was a current coming in underneath, and
before long it was perfectly clear. The rock was tremendous, spreading
out beneath the surface and going down, down, all covered with slime
and sea-weeds. Eepersip was fascinated watching those little fishes:
she cared for nothing else. How long might she have watched them if
the tide bad not been rising and rising? Now it was touching her dress
when a ripple larger than the others came in. And now--a flash of
lightning down there in the shadows! Eepersip could not realize what
had happened. Then she thought: a great brownish-green fish had shot
into the middle of the shoal, seized one of them, and carried it off.
It was so quick that Eepersip could not think, until some time after
it was all over, what had really happened.

She swam to the
shore, but, to her surprise, it was quite a different shore from where
she had started. She wondered where she was. She landed on a beach of
white sand, so fine that it was impossible to hold. It was covered with
shells of all colours. These interested her for a long time, and she
piled up the whole beach with heaps of them that she had collected,
and had a beautiful time playing with herself until--

She saw
some footprints! _Footprints!_ They came down on the beach and
apparently into the water, then out again, and disappeared in the woods
on a narrow path which Eepersip had not noticed before.

But she
was not interested in where they went to or where they came from. Her
only thought was to get away--away. It was then too late to go out
in the sea again--that is, far from shore. The sun was about to set.
She would spend the night there, and then she would wander again. So
she lay down and went to sleep.

The next morning when she
woke up she was not alone. A little golden-haired boy with sky-blue
eyes was looking at her. They looked at each other for a long time.

"Who are you?" he ventured at last.

Here was a puzzler.
"Eepersip Eigleen," she answered. "I mean," she added doubtfully, "I
_was_." 

"Who are you now, then?"

"I don't know
exactly."

"Why don't you?"

"I haven't any name now. I'm
just somebody. Have _you_ any name?"

"Yes--Toby--Toby Carrenda."

"Do you live here in the woods?"

"Yes."

"In a house?"

He looked at her curiously a moment; then
he said: "Yes, of course--don't you?"

"NO!"

"How
funny!"

"Yes, it is." With a little reluctance--"Will you play
with me?"

Strange: here was Eepersip, who detested people,
asking a little boy to play with her! It was simply that she, not
having seen any children for a long time, was fascinated by this small
boy who seemed so unafraid of her and so natural.

They wandered
together on the beach and picked up shells. Then Eepersip asked the
little boy if he liked to swim.

"Yes," he said. "But do you
think I'd better?"

"Yes--why not?"

"All right."

So he took off all his clothes and went in with her, and they
splashed each other and had a lovely time. Eepersip wanted to make him
a mermaid dress, but there was no sea-weed right there, and she didn't
want to leave him. So they went into the woods to find some ferns to
make him a nymph dress. She found a beautiful ferny glade, and sat
down and began to weave ferns together, talking to him at the same
time. When it was all done he was delighted.

"But, please," he
said, "can't I have a shell, too?"

He touched the shell strung
up on her sea-weed dress. They looked all over the beach, and at last
they found another shell with a hole all the way through. Then he was
entirely content.

They went into the woods together and picked
flowers, and Eepersip showed him how to make fern dresses and how to
weave wreaths of flowers. They went into a grove of sunlit white pines
and danced there together. Finally the little boy said: "I'm hungry,
Eeserpip."

"It's _Eepersip_," she said, "but it doesn't
matter much. I'll find you something to eat." After a while they found
some flame-coloured berries, and then Eepersip dug up some white roots
of which she was fond.

The boy said: "This is jolly, it is. Is
this the way you get your food?"

"Always," she said.

They
played a while longer, and then someone called.

Eepersip had a
strange feeling at that moment. She could not help feeling a certain
reluctance when she had first played with him; then she had decided
that he could not have anything to do with the civilized people she
hated so. He must be separate from them, perhaps even a wild thing
like herself. She felt a sensation of horror when the strange voice
sounded. Then he was not alone--then he lived in a house with other
people!

Startled, she cried: "Who's that?"

"My mother,"
he answered.

"Then you don't live here all by yourself?" She
had a bitter feeling of disappointment.

"Oh, no."

"I
_wish_ you did." This escaped her before she could think. Strange,
that some magic power in this child had already made her say as much
as had said.

"I must go now," he said sorrowfully. "But I'll be
out this afternoon--I guess."

Eepersip fell on her knees in
front of him and said entreatingly: "Will you do something for me?"

"I will--maybe."

"Don't tell _anybody_ about me."

"Why?"

"Never mind why, but don't, will you?"

"I want
to."

"Then I won't play with you any more."

"All right,
Eepersip. I won't." She looked at him doubtfully. "I _promise_ you
I won't. Goodbye. I like you."

Eepersip was delighted with
her little friend. She waited anxiously for him to come out. Presently
he came.

"Eepersip," he said, "will you swim with me again?"

They went in again, and this time Eepersip showed him how to swim,
by holding him up while he kicked with his arms and legs. After a long
time he could swim a little bit by himself; and then Eepersip took him
to some rather high rocks and showed him how to jump in. At first he
wouldn't do it alone; she took his hand and they jumped in together.
After that he did it alone, and screamed with laughter when he came
up. Then Eepersip showed him how to go in head first, and he had so
much faith in her that he tried it right off. Although he went rather
flat, he liked it very much. The next time Eepersip bent him 'way over
before he went in, and he straightened out and hit the water clean as
an arrow. That was much better, he said.

Eepersip asked him what
his mother had said about the fern dress, for he had gone in so quickly
that he had forgotten his own clothes. He said that she had asked him
about it, and he had said that he found it. Eepersip thanked him for
not telling about her.

But she was discovered in spite of her
caution. One day when they were playing in the woods, Mrs. Carrenda
came out and found them. Eepersip dashed for the waves immediately, in
spite of the fact that Toby's mother called: "Don't run away, little
girl; I won't hurt you!"

But Toby began to cry bitterly. "Why
did you send her away, Mother?"

"I didn't, Toby. She ran as
soon as I came. Who is she?"

That Toby did not answer. There
were two instincts equally strong struggling within him--one to obey
his mother, and the other to do what the strange girl asked him to
with the threat of refusing to play with him if he did not.

"I
can't tell you, Mother," he said courageously. It would have been as
true if he had said "I don't know," for he knew nothing but her name,
after all. However, he never stopped to think that knowing her name was
not all there was to knowing _her_.

Mrs. Carrenda wisely
pursued the matter no further; but she determined to keep watch.

Eepersip was much more cautious after this. She was always on the
lookout. Several times Toby asked her why she didn't want to be seen.
But she would not answer him. She was, however, very kind in all
other respects. Several times Mrs. Carrenda found Toby playing with
her, but never spoke or let him know. She saw that Eepersip played
nicely with him and that they liked each other much; so she did not
interfere. Once, however, she put her hands suddenly on Eepersip's
shoulders from behind and said kindly: "Little girl, don't be afraid
of me."

Eepersip sprang to her feet, stared wildly a moment,
and then dashed off straight to the sea. But for fear of making Toby
very unhappy, Mrs. Carrenda never questioned him about her.

She
and her husband had many anxious conferences together. Her husband
thought that it was exceedingly risky to let Toby play so unwatched
with Eepersip, but Toby's mother did not feel that way at all. Then
they talked over the matter of who she was.

One day Eepersip was
peeping into the house to see if she could find Toby, for he had not
been out to play with her. Looking into the dining-room, she saw him
there, eating luncheon with Mr. and Mrs. Carrenda. They were talking
anxiously, and she was curious, and listened.

"I have it," said
Mr. Carrenda suddenly. "Don't you remember those people--the Eeglines,
or Eigleens--that came over to the hill near Mount Varcrobis where we
lived before we came here? who wanted to know if we had seen a strange
little girl, dressed all in ferns? She is the Eigleens' lost little
girl."

Mrs. Carrenda looked puzzled. 

"They told us, you
know, that they had given up all hope of having Ee--ee--serpip" (Toby
started violently) "back again--"

"Oh yes, I remember now."

"--When Fleuriss came, and--"

"Oh yes, it all comes back
to me now. They were making a great effort to find her and entice her
back home by telling her about her baby sister."

"Yes."

"Why, father," said Toby," Eepersip--"He suddenly saw her in his
mind, kneeling in front of him, begging him not to tell--and he said
no more. Nobody noticed his remark.

A moment Mrs. Carrenda
gazed at her husband astounded. Then she said: "I believe it is so.
Let us send word to them right off."

"No," said Mr. Carrenda,
bluntly. "Supposing they came all the way down here. Supposing the
plan failed. Mrs. Eigleen would only be unhappier than ever. We'll
just have to let them alone for a while. Supposing _we_ try
it. Supposing it fails. Mrs. Eigleen will never know. Supposing it
succeeds. They will be _much_ happier, and we shall have made
some staunch and grateful friends."

"Oh, let's try it!" agreed
Mrs. Carrenda.

"I bet Eepersip--Ee-serpip, Eeserpip, Eepersip,
Eeserpip, Eepersip--funny name! I bet she'll go home fast when she
finds out."

"Perhaps--but she is like a sea-nymph now. How
strange it is! Well, it's worth trying, at any rate."

Eepersip
had listened with growing amazement--fascinated, entranced. But when
they paused in their conversation, the charm was broken that had held
her there. She sped away into the woods. She came to a place that she
knew well, a glade surrounded by ferns and a few wild-rose-bushes now
in bloom.

She had a little sister!--it was too much. And that
little sister haunted her dreams and her imagination, making everything
seem less joyful than before. She felt a strange longing--the longing
to see her. She might be several years old now. Eepersip had forgotten
what a "year" meant, but she had a vague feeling that Fleuriss had been
living some time already. Why had no one told her? She felt a sort of
angry resentment, but it cooled immediately when she remembered that
her parents _had_ been trying desperately to tell her. Yes, a
plan was certainly shaping itself in Eepersip's mind--but not the
plan of letting herself be caught, tamed, and carried home. No indeed.
She dreamed of some day going home by stealth, seeing Fleuriss, and
playing with her as she now played with Toby. She wondered silently if
she would be anything like the fair-haired little boy. She wondered
whether Fleuriss, too, would play with her secretly. If Fleuriss
were like Toby, how wonderful it would be!

But the problem of
getting back home to see her did not appear so serious to her now
while she had Toby to play with.

She continued her beloved
explorations, discovering islands, beaches, peninsulas, and rocks out
of sight of land, which she charted down in her mind, so that she
could almost always find them.

One day Toby came to her and
told her that they were going off on a tramp, rowing over across the
bay to the woods near a little cottage that Mr. Carrenda knew about.
They had always been interested in the cottage; they wanted to see
who was living there. And they had heard about some beautiful hills
behind it, which Mr. Carrenda wanted very much to see. And if it was
pleasant they were going to start the next day. Eepersip was curious.
She wondered if it could possibly be _her_ cottage and _her_
hills--the cottage she had discovered, and the hills that she had
climbed about in. She decided to follow and see where it was that the
Carrendas were going.

When the boat started she let it get some
way off, then she plunged into the sea and followed it. The waves came
up behind, and she gained fast, but when she got dangerously near she
stopped for a while, waiting for the boat to get farther off. They
landed just where she thought they might--by the little cottage.

Near it they set up their tent, and soon they were exploring the
peninsula. They climbed the beautiful hill which Eepersip had climbed.
Once they saw her as she darted behind a tree, and wondered how she
had got there so quickly. And they fell to talking about her again.
She heard them talking over their plan of capturing her, telling her
about Fleuriss, and, when she had been smoothed down a bit, letting
her go back to the Eigleens to make them happy. If only they could
have foreseen!

They tried only once, and never had the chance
again. It was a golden day in October. Eepersip was sitting on a rock
repairing some tears in her sea-weed dress. The waves were high, and
every once in a while a little spray would splash up on to the rock
where she was sitting. Mr. Carrenda discovered her sitting there,
and, tiptoeing forward he caught her by the shoulders. She gnashed
her little white teeth at him and struggled to get away, but he held
her fast, and was about to pick her up in his arms. She shouted: "O
waves, help me!" And, magically, a great wave rushed up, whirled itself
into the air, and broke in Mr. Carrenda's face. He dropped her, and
with a lightning manœuvre she dived down from the rock into the sea,
and was far out before he recovered from the surprise. After this she
remained far from the cottage and made her home on a deserted island.
This island was a lovely place. It had a beach of fine sand on one side
and was entirely surrounded with rocks on the other sides--rocks and,
in places, even high cliffs. There was a grove of yellow pines there,
where Eepersip danced when she wished to turn nymph again. There was
a spring of fresh water on a small hill behind the grove. The hill
was still covered with blueberries and raspberries; also there was a
multitude of the plants with the sweet white roots that Eepersip was
so fond of. There were asters, too, and Eepersip wove them in with her
ferns or sea-weed, and crowned herself with them. Very happy to find
not a single house on the island, she lived there for a long time,
glad also to be able to have both the sea and the woods, to which
she still instinctively returned occasionally. The period through
which she stayed on this uninhabited island was one of the happiest
stretches of her life by the sea.

But, now that she was alone
again, Eepersip was filled once more with longing to see the little
sister--to know her, love her, play with her, teach her to leap and
dance and swim: filled with curiosities about what was going on at the
home which she had been away from for so long. And these emotions grew
and grew until they became a firm resolution. She struggled a while
to prevent herself from thinking she had made a mistake in running
away, and, thinking it all over, said that she had not, even if she
did miss such exciting things as little sisters.

The plan of
seeing Fleuriss had become more and more developed, now that she saw
little of the boy and had more time to think about it. (It was only
once in a while that she swam to the mainland to play with him.) Her
idea had changed a great deal: it now was to take Fleuriss away to
live with her. She wondered whether she could ever get her over those
awful crags, through that shadowy forest, to the sea; whether she
could make her comfortable living the wild life. Here was a difficult
situation, for Eepersip was sure that so young a child could never
endure the hardships of the life she lived--at least, until she was
used to it.

This problem troubled her mind for days. Then,
suddenly, as she was gazing over the restless murmuring sea, she had
a great inspiration, "Oh! beautiful!" she exclaimed in her delight.
The vision of the little brown cottage in the grove of white pines had
come back to her--the whole thing, how she had been borne to it on
her raft by those friendly yet terrible waves. And now she had a use
for it! It seemed strange, when she hated houses so. But then, no one
need know. She would go at once and make sure whether the Carrendas
had gone from their camp, then fix up the cottage and discover all its
secrets. _Then_ she could go and take Fleuriss away.

So
one cold day she swam back to the cottage. The Carrendas' tent was
gone; everything was as it had been before. But this time it did not
appear hateful. She opened the door and went into the pleasant little
living-room with the fireplace. Then she investigated the whole house
shore thoroughly. She found a room with glass cupboards on the walls,
filled with a marvellous collection of all kinds of sea-weeds, shells,
and corals (how Fleuriss would enjoy them! she thought); and there was
a tiny kitchen, There was one small attic room, with a ladder going
up to it through a trap-door, and in it was a soft little bed with
warm blankets, and a fireplace. Above the bed were three casement
windows, and Eepersip liked to think how it would delight Fleuriss to
see the stars out these. When she went to the second floor she came
to a snug alcove with glass doors opening on to a porch, free to the
wind and sun, overlooking the sea: and two sunny bedrooms.

But
just as she was preparing to start after Fleuriss, her reason again
detained her. Fleuriss of course could not begin her wild life in the
winter: she must have a summer of it first, to see what it was like. So
Eepersip waited patiently till spring. During the winter she lived in
a great pasture on a hill behind the cottage.

The spring
came round incredibly soon, and again Eepersip prepared to start.

The night before she went a great black cloud came up from the
west, and soon a gale was raging. The waves mounted higher than any
Eepersip had ever seen before, topped with flying snow-white spray.
They leaped the highest cliffs, thundered on the wet rocks, and then
retreated, awashing down through the cracks with a strange hollow
sound and sweeping the sea-weeds wildly up and down. The wind sounded
as on a mountain-top, a curious mixture of high-pitched whistling
and bass droning. Occasionally it would rise into a terrific scream,
making the waves rage with the uncanny storm-green. At the crisis of
the storm Eepersip, who had been standing on the beach watching, her
curls flying, her ferns fluttering and often tearing loose, flung
herself into the storm from a high rock, and was swept about like a
tiny insect, disappearing under a wave, bobbing up to take a breath
just as the next breaker washed over her. She had a glorious time out
in the waves and the spray. The sea-gulls shrieked; sometimes they
struck at a fish, and appeared all covered with spray and shaking the
drops from their wings--strong narrow wings that beat down the air as
the birds rose again, to hover and swoop and plunge. These marvellous
birds being blown wildly in the gale reminded Eepersip of the swallows,
as they were tossed about by the high pasture winds--the swallows
she had loved so when she lived on the meadow.

Slowly the wind
abated its fury, and Eepersip, covered with water-drops and spray like
a silver fish or a sea-gull, swam to the shore bubbling with happiness.
With the water still standing on her hair, she sang a sea-song on the
beach, accompanied by the rocking waves, now calmed down, and by the
screaming and wildly circling gulls.

It was a wonderful night
afterwards, for soon the sea was entirely calm, and the moon and the
stars came out, reflecting themselves in trembling silver. Eepersip was
up all that night, dancing singing, swimming and diving in the glorious
moonlight. And then she remembered--to-morrow! and went up on the hill
to say good-bye to the meadow, the pastured hill, and quiet, mossy pool
that she had loved so.

Up on the hill she saw the sun rise.
First the dark blue sky turned grey, and then a pearly streak came on
the horizon as the first ray of the sun appeared; then it turned to
the most heavenly shade of pink and deep rose, and then into the blue
of one of the most gorgeous days Eepersip had ever seen. She gazed
and gazed at the dawn until it grew pale and buttercup yellow, and
finally turned to blue. The sun made a mass of gold sun-sparkles on the
sea, and they blended together from the high hill and formed a solid
splotch of gold, separating at the edges into individual sparkles.
It was a windy day, but the wind was warm, and at first the sea was
only rippling gently and smiling.

Then Eepersip remembered her
little sister Fleuriss, and she wished her already there to share that
beautiful, beautiful day. And off at one end of the beach she found, to
her delight, a little green boat with two oars, which had been washed
in by the storm. Now she had everything she needed, for the clumsy
raft was difficult to manage in the wind, and she might even be blown
so far off that she could never find the cottage again. Now, however,
all was ready.

And so she made her way home, beginning in the
boat, and rowing to where she had first entered the sea; then past the
great precipices over which she had so laboriously clambered as she
went to the sea. over hills, down into valleys, crossing rivers, and
tearing her way through forests, until at last, to her delight, she
arrived at the beautiful meadow where she had spent her first years
of wildness with Chippy, Snowflake and the deer.

The deer did
not remember Eepersip; that was one thing which distressed her. But
a little fawn came cautiously and sniffed at her, obviously wishing
he dared to approach and eat the ferns of her dress. She did not see
Chippy anywhere.

She was soon at her own house, spying around,
and looking in windows. All she could think of was Fleuriss, her little
sister.



III
THE MOUNTAINS

The droning wind
Entwined about the peaks
A golden trail of music...
Far off, the snow-topped mountains
Were sea-waves
Capped with foam.

Eepersip had begun to wonder whether
it would be so easy to take Fleuriss away. She might consent to play,
like Toby; but to run away, like Eepersip?--it was a great problem.
Eepersip must use some other means than simply appearing and asking
her sister to go with her. Perhaps she would entice her on with the
assurance that there was something wonderful waiting. Or maybe she
could show Fleuriss wonder after wonder--point out the beautiful
sea from far away, then lead her on to the little cottage which she
had prepared. And if Fleuriss was cold, or hungry, what should she
do then? Perhaps she would not like roots to eat. Then, suddenly, an
idea: she would dress herself up in wonderful flowers interwoven with
the ferns, she would lure butterflies about her wreaths, she would
bear armfuls of roses and apple-blossoms and lilacs and scatter them
over Fleuriss, she would make her a fern dress, and, thus fascinating
her, draw her away.

Eepersip wondered where she could sleep,
near the house, and yet concealed. She thought of returning to the
meadow, but that would be too far for convenient communication with
Fleuriss. And then she saw a lilac-bush on the eastern side of the
cottage--a great tall lilac-bush, thick and with great branches. It
looked as though she could go into it. And when she tried, she found,
to her great delight, that she could squeeze in, curl up in comfort,
and be absolutely invisible from the outside.

Then she began to
make her fairy array, weaving more ferns into her skirt, and more and
more, until it was thick and flouncy--maiden-hair ferns and Christmas
ferns, evergreen ferns and hay-scented ferns. She tucked flowers all
over her dress--late daffodils, cosmos, wild geraniums, primroses.
She made a girdle of yellow daisies, a crown of golden buttercups;
she plucked a bunch of roses, lilacs, and ferns, binding them with
daisies woven together. A great bouquet of violets decorated her
dress--violets and little white Pyrolas. With a huge hollyhock for her
wand and her arms full of lilacs and roses, she danced in the woods,
thinking how her little sister would wonder--and follow.

That
evening early she climbed an oak which was beside the window of her
former room, and peeped in. The moonlight shone on the face of a child
lying in a little wooden crib. She had fluffy black curls and bright,
snapping black eyes, and she was watching delightedly the shadows of
the branches on her wall and softly humming.

"Oh," breathed
Eepersip, "the little sister. I want her, I want her!" Entranced,
Eepersip watched, sitting in a crotch just outside the window--watched
her as she lay there, tracing with her finger the curving patterns
on her wall-paper; as she played her hands in the moonlight and the
waving shadows on her wall. And after a while the humming died away,
the finger ceased to stroke the wall, her eyes closed, and in a moment
she was gently sleeping. Before Eepersip went down she left a fair
sprig of apple-blossoms on Fleuriss's bed--apple-blossoms that, with
difficulty, she had brought up the tree. When she went back to her
lilac-bush she imagined Fleuriss's surprise, when she should wake, to
see them on her bed; imagined Fleuriss following her, all fascinated
by butterflies and sweet flowers; imagined her little sister climbing
mountains with her, eating berries and roots, swimming and diving and
dancing; and--Her thoughts began to grow more and more fantastic
--the smell of lilacs intoxicated her--and she went to sleep.

In the morning she climbed the tree again. Fleuriss was just
waking. Her eyes were turned toward the lovely oak-tree, watching
the sunlight playing on the emerald leaves. She caught a glimpse of
Eepersip as she vanished around the trunk.

"Oh, Mother," she
called softly. "I saw a nymph! She smiled at me, and went away."

"Hush, child," said Mrs. Eigleen, coming upstairs and stroking
gently the silky black hair. "You were only dreaming."

"No,
Mother," returned the child, "I was awake. I _saw_ a nymph,
really."

Mrs. Eigleen only smiled.

And then Fleuriss saw
the flowers. "O Mother," she cried, " did you bring those to me?" Mrs.
Eigleen was wonderstruck.

"Why, no!" she answered.

"Maybe
that nymph left them here."

Mrs. Eigleen was astounded enough
not to contradict her. "Perhaps," she said.

Eepersip descended
again and ran off to her safe hiding-place in the lilac-bush. "She is
so, so lovely!" she thought. "I want her more and more."

In a
short time little Fleuriss appeared with Mrs. Eigleen. "Fleuriss," said
her mother, "you may play here in the garden, but don't go outside it,
and don't climb the trees."

"All right, Mother."

"And
don't run off and worry me as you did once before." She had _not_
forgotten Eepersip. Perhaps she scented something in the air. Those
flowers troubled her.

"No, I won't."

Mrs. Eigleen
went in, and Fleuriss began to run about and play. Then Eepersip
stepped out from under the bush, and the lovely butterflies, lured
by her flowers, fluttered and hovered around her.

"Oh," said
Fleuriss," goodness, how you frightened me. Sit down on the grass,
and talk with me. And _how_ do you get those butterflies? They
always fly away from me."

"Listen, Fleuriss," said Eepersip.
"I am Eepersip, who ran away. The butterflies and birds all love me
and come to me in great flocks when I call them. And I want you. I
want to take you with me to live wild, and eat leaves and berries with
the birds--sweet red berries. And if you come the butterflies will
gather around you, too. They will not any other way. And look at all
my flowers! Butterflies love my flowers."

"Oh, did _you_
bring me those _bee-yoo-ti-ful_ flowers?"

"Yes, I did. Come!"

"Oh," answered Fleuriss, "and wouldn't it be funny
if Mother came out and found me not here!"

"And think--the
birds, the butterflies, the flowers! Look, I'd dress you like this,
with ferns and flowers and butterflies. And what fun we could have!
We would dance and sing and chase each other amongst the fluttering
leaves."

"Oo, I could never catch you."

"No, but I could
catch you, and that would be as much fun."

"But Mother doesn't
like me to eat leaves, and berries all the time make one sick."

"But we would not have berries all the time. We would dig up sweet
white roots and wash them clean; and _m-m!_ they are good, little
sister Fleuriss. We would have honey. The bees gather honey from the
flowers, which they would share with us."

"Bees sting," said
Fleuriss, shrinking away; "they sting, and they hurt, Eepersip."

"Oh, but the bees love us all so they don't sting us," answered
Eepersip. "It's only the people that try to hurt them that they sting.
We wouldn't hurt them."

"Oh, _Eepersip!_ the leaves and
butterflies, and--and honey--_m-m!_ But I oughtn't, really," she
said, backing off toward the house.

"Oh, come," said Eepersip,
"come, don't go away. Your Mother wouldn't care; she would love to see
how happy you were. _Please_ come." And Eepersip's hands went out
in supplication, scattering over Fleuriss wreaths of flowers, sprays
of berries, crimson, gold, frosty white.

"Oh, how beautiful!"
exclaimed the little girl. But when she looked up, Eepersip had
vanished.

Suddenly the door opened and Mrs. Eigleen stepped
out. Eepersip had darted under the welcome branches of an apple-tree,
whose thick blossoms kept her from sight.

"How sweet it smells!"
said Mrs. Eigleen--"just as if a fairy had been here. Where did
those flowers come from, Fleuriss?"

"Oh," answered Fleuriss,
"I saw the most beautiful girl. She brought me flowers and called
me 'little _sister'_ and wanted me to go away with her!"

Pale and weak from fright, Mrs. Eigleen took Fleuriss by the hand
and dragged her roughly into the house.

Eepersip sat down under
the apple-tree in ecstasy. "I saw her," she said softly, "I saw her
and talked to her, and--oh, how dear she is! But I _do_
wish she hadn't told about me." She waited there, and in a short time
Fleuriss appeared again, running.

"Eepersip, Eepersip," she
cried, "where are you?"

In a moment Eepersip had her arms around
her waist, kissing her and hugging her.

"Are you coming?" she
asked; "have you decided to come, Fleuriss?"

"Y-y-es," said
Fleuriss, "I really have, Eepersip. I thought all dinner time, and
couldn't eat, I was so 'xcited! But we must go quickly now, or they
will run after us."

So they ran quickly into the woods--ran
amid the trees and flowers until they were far from the house. Eepersip
showed her little sister how to dance, and they danced together. She
also showed her how to leap and run fast, and Fleuriss was delighted.
When they grew tired, they sat down together and made fern dresses and
flower wreaths. Fleuriss followed Eepersip's example, casting aside
her dress, shoes, and stockings.

"Oh, how 'licious the grass
feels on my bare toes!" she said, "and the soft moss. Eepersip, I feel
just like a nymph." (A slight pause.) "When I saw the flowers I said:
'Mother, I think a _nymph_ left them there,' and she said: 'Oh,
no, there aren't any nymphs. You're only dreaming!' _Are_ there
nymphs, Eepersip?"

"Oh, yes, Fleuriss, and if we dance and run
and dress just like them, we'll pretend _we're_ nymphs, too."

"But why can't we _see_ them, Eepersip?"

"Oh, we can,
if we look very hard. They're all around in the trees, the flowers,
and the woods. _Sometimes_ we can't see them, and they turn into
butterflies so we can. I can see them." 

"Well, sometimes," said
Fleuriss thoughtfully, "it seems as if they were everywhere--when it's
windy, you know, and sunny, and there are shadows. In my garden it's
so beautiful I think there must be nymphs. I can _feel_ them,
not exactly see."

There was a pause.

Then--"Where we
going now, Eepersip?" for Eepersip was gradually working off to a hill
which was a peak of Mount Varcrobis, north of Eiki-ennern Peak.

"Fleuriss," said Eepersip, with a strange emotion in her voice,"
have you ever seen the sea?"

"No, but I heard Mother talking
about it once. She said maybe you had gone down there; and she told me
it was lots of blue water, and there were boats there. Did you really
go there?"

"Yes; it's _so_ beautiful, Fleuriss. The sun
makes the waves sparkle like gold, and the great white gulls with their
long, narrow wings go gliding, circling over the water, sometimes
plunging down and catching fish underneath. And there is white sand
there, soft sand, and shells and pretty pebbles, and little fishes
swimming. And when it's windy the waves come dashing up on the rocks,
flinging spray high in the air. And there is sea-weed, too, Fleuriss,
green sea-weed that goes floating up and down as the waves stir it.
And corals, too. Oh, my little sister, it's so, so beautiful. I would
show you how to leap into it from the rocks, and how to swim--to
be a mermaid and play with the gulls and the fishes, dressed all in
sea-weeds!"

"Oh, Eepersip I let's go _now!_"

"And I
have a little cottage down there for you to live in--a pretty little
cottage just like your home."

"Oh, how nice!"

"And we
shall go riding up and down on the great waves, Fleuriss, while the
sea-gulls scream over our heads. We shall go 'way out of sight of land
and find islands and rocks out there. And the waves are tremendous
when it's windy--very windy."

"Oo--"

"Fleuriss!" And
Eepersip caught her little sister in her arms--glad that she had
succeeded in entrancing her with the sea.

"But, Eepersip,"
said Fleuriss, doubtfully, "where _are_ we going now?"

"I
thought, Fleuriss, that we'd go to that great hill over there--do you
see?"

"Yes."

"Go over there so that you can see from 'way
of how beautiful it is."

"Oh yes; I'm crazy to see it!"

Eepersip saw that this hill was wooded on one side, but on the far
side it was like a pasture--she could see sunlight glinting on it.
On they went, often stopping to pick flowers, to dig up roots, or to
refresh themselves at some little tinkling brook or mossy spring. Once
as they were pushing through a fence of low beech-branches they came
to a spring all surrounded with green moss--oh! so soft. There were
ferns nodding beside it, and one or two strange pink orchids gazed at
themselves admiringly in its surface. At the bottom were white stones.
A cool, green frog plopped into it as they arrived. And Fleuriss was
fascinated. She sat there for a long time, watching him reappear for
air, then bob down again when he saw that they were still watching
him.

Again they came into a great meadow dotted with flowers.
Butterflies with soft wings stroked Eepersip's cheeks caressingly.
Fleuriss danced through the flowers, looking, as Eepersip thought, like
a little butterfly herself. The sky was a heavenly deep blue--a rich
deep blue, yet filled and sparkling with all the gold of the sun and
all the coolth of snow. She could see for miles into it, as if it had
suddenly come nearer than usual. She reached up and could almost see
her fingers touching it. What a strange sensation!

But Fleuriss
had a stranger one. As Eepersip danced along, it seemed as though
her feet barely touched the ground. The flowers and grasses swayed
gently beneath her, but they were not crushed. And Fleuriss felt a
bit of dread coming into her mind--dread of living and staying with
this strange sister. What if she should grow tired of Fleuriss and
run off? Suppose she should change into a tree--a leaf--a sprite?
But Fleuriss fought with this feeling--because she wanted to live
by the ocean, and to do the things that Eepersip had promised.

After a while they came to the foot of the great hill. They
slept down there, near a tiny lakelet, in the soft grass and among
the flowers, with the tinkle, tinkle of a little brook in their ears
all night. The next morning they climbed the hill together, and it
was very steep and rocky. Fleuriss had to be helped often, and grew
tired before she reached the top. But Eepersip lured her on by the
promise of seeing the ocean, and they struggled painfully up.

The sea stretched away to the horizon, blue and sparkling as it
met the sky. Fleuriss was spellbound. 

"Eepersip, is that the
sea?" she asked.

"Yes, Fleuriss--the sea, the sea!"

Off to the north was a range of high blue-green hills, and off beyond
them higher ones, and higher--billowing mountains--and beyond them
was a range of snowy peaks, rising, sharply outlined, into the blue.
The lakelet where they had slept was like an opal set with dark green
pines. But those mountains--! never before had Eepersip seen anything
like them. The sea was not nearly so beautiful. And again she felt
that longing which she had felt when she saw the sea--but a more
passionate longing.

And Fleuriss? How could she climb those
great peaks--she, who had had great difficulty even with the little
hill? Well, Fleuriss could grow more used to such things, and then
they would go together. But Fleuriss--Fleuriss barefoot, dressed in
ferns--on those snowy summits! No, it would be impossible for years
and years. She would have to wait--or else go alone.

But the hill had other things than just the view. For there were the loveliest
little winding lanes, and bright open places, and close spots where
they could hardly push through the bushes; great patches of delicious
soft grass, then again enormous smooth-topped rocks from where they had
first found the long-sought vision of the sea. Such feasts as Nature
laid before them! There were great beds of the most delicious wild
strawberries, and nobody to sham them with but the birds. And they and
the birds gobbled them; and it seemed as if the more they ate the more
there were to eat; they ripened all the time. And in this marvellous
place there were such contrasts! They could have anything they wanted
there. There were places where the sun always struck brilliantly, and
cool, shady ones for the hot days--places where not much sun ever
came. There was the loveliest of soft grass, and then again nothing but
brambles and heaps of pointed rocks. There were lanes leading through
the woods occasionally, and there were places where no one would ever
suspect that there was any such thing as a lane. There were little
fairy glades where they could dance together--glades bordered with
ferns and carpeted with moss.

Fleuriss and Eepersip lived there
enchanted day after day, and although they often saw the sea, they did
not wish to leave the hill. Fleuriss spoke about it several times,
but Eepersip would hurriedly change the subject. That range of blued
hills seemed to be calling her--she would forget the sea for a while,
until the next year. After they had stayed where they were for some
time, they would go on and on to the blue hills, and perhaps explore
the great snowy mountains beyond. She could manage with Fleuriss
somehow.

One day they went exploring farther than ever toward
the east. They followed a narrow path, winding, winding through the
bushes. And then it curved around toward the north-east and led through
low laurel-trees, and here Eepersip stopped to make for Fleuriss a
crown of the blossoms. And again the path turned and came on to a
broader gravel road all bordered with gorgeous roses of red and white,
and Fleuriss was very much surprised at their magnificent beauty.
But Eepersip was distressed. So they had come to a place where there
were roads, houses, and people! But as yet they had seen no house.
Eepersip hoped that there would be none, for she was as entranced as
Fleuriss with the beauty of it all. And then they switched off on
another little path, leading southeast on to a wide lawn all bordered
with marvellous roses. Here they danced together a long time. Next
they turned into another gravelled path which led eastward, through
clumps of roses and laurel, downhill and uphill, for a long way; and
then they saw a garden brilliant with colour. Fleuriss was dazed, there
were so many flowering bushes--rhododendron, laurel, honeysuckle,
azalea, quince, and fire-blossom. Hummingbirds, bright emerald and
ruby with moonlight wings, were darting and sparkling about, sipping
honey, resting and quivering on the air.

But soon after they
had discovered the garden, Eepersip said that she was going on a short
journey, coming back in two or three days. "Will you be all right here
alone, little sister?" she said anxiously.

"Oh yes, Eepersip,
and I'm going to find lots of things to show you when you come back.
But where are you going?"

"I'm going--going--to a beautiful
place--and take you there sometime."

"Oh--I see. Can't I go
now?"

"No--because--it would be too hard now. Wait till I go
and find the easiest way for you."

"All right--good-bye!"

And, with a rustle of ferns, Eepersip vanished around a great
rhododendron-bush.

Fleuriss continued her explorations
alone. She saw a gorgeous butterfly come sailing toward her, of yellow
streaked with black. Others followed, and they covered her with soft
wing-caresses, crowning her head with their wings. Fleuriss thought (as
Eepersip had told her) that they were the fairies turning themselves
into butterflies so that she could see them.

Not a mouse stirred
when she wormed her way through the bushes, taking care not to step on
leaves or dry twigs so as to make a noise. And then the sun started to
set and turned the whole sky golden and rose. Fleuriss crept in among
a vine with golden flowers (there was no rich purple fruit yet, only
the lovely flowers) and watched. And, lo! each leaf was quivering, and
on their smooth surfaces was represented another miniature sunset. How
marvellous the rose and gold looked through the mass of trembling green
leaves

Then Fleuriss squeezed her way out of the bush and began
to explore again. Pushing northward in the dim, rosy light, she came
to a smooth lawn of pale green moss. On the other side was a stretch
of woods, then another lawn, of grass this time and smaller; and then
there was a great row of massive pines and beyond them an opaline lake.
And still the sun went down, and the mass of colour became smaller and
brighter, and Fleuriss, who had never seen so much beauty in her little
life, gazed and gazed. The colour faded slowly, slowly, as she watched,
until only a deep flush was left, and it was then that Fleuriss thought
she was in the heart of a giant rose. And--inconceivable--she looked,
and she was. She was sure of it. She could even see the great curling
petals around her. Right at the sun was a burning spot. That was the
pollen of the great flower. And this tiny fire burned and burned until
only one bright red spark was left. Then it too went out, and after
it all the rose colour faded away.

Then Fleuriss turned to the
lake, which also had held in its bright blue surface an image of the
sunset. The sky was deep blue now. The pines looked even darker against
it, and in the lake Fleuriss could see the reflection of the crescent
moon setting. And then she ran down by the side of the lake, and very
dark and strange it looked in the evening. Dipping her little hands
into the clear, crystal water, she drank, for she was thirsty. But she
was too tired to appreciate any more beauty just then, and so she crept
back to her little nest of flowers to go to sleep. Then she heard a
gurgle of sweet silvery music, and she listened spellbound, entranced.
But it was no wicked witch, seeking to entice her by spells: it was
the solitary wood-thrush, that superb singer of the dusk. And then
Fleuriss dropped off to sleep.

The next morning dawned fair,
and she rose bewitched with what she had been through. The sunset and
the silvery notes of the thrush all came back to her. She went down
by the lake. It was very different now. Its blue was sparkling with
the rays of the sun, whereas before it had looked very solitary--an
icy cold blue. There was no beach--just a grassy bank--and in the
shallow water she saw some little silvery fishes swimming and playing
in shoals. And she watched them in their happy play for a long time,
fascinated by the way they raced after each other around the shining
stones and pebbles. Because they were so bright and gleaming, poor
little Fleuriss thought that they were some rare and unheard-of fish,
little dreaming that they were just common minnows.

Eepersip
came back that day in a strange way. Fleuriss was looking down on the
meadowy side of the hill, where the long green grass waved in the wind
and butterflies were fluttering. And as she looked, suddenly--there
was Eepersip standing in front of her. She had come from nowhere--she
was just there without coming at all. Fleuriss was appalled. She
remembered that strange dancing--was her sister about to melt into the
air? Fleuriss stood stock-still.

Finally she raised her head and
said, at first faintly, but with growing enthusiasm: "Oh, Eepersip,
last night there was a great rose, and I was inside it--and I found a
beautiful lake with fishes in it--oh, wonderful fishes of silver--and
the beautiful birdie sang me to sleep in the flowers." And then, her
voice sounding strangely timid: "O Eepersip--I want--Mother--to see
it--so beautiful. I love--it here, but----I know Mother would like
to see it, too. And I guess I can't get along without her. I guess I
can't, Eepersip."

Eepersip was broken-hearted. "But, Fleuriss,"
she said--and Fleuriss shuddered a very little as Eepersip took her
hand--"Fleuriss, if your mother came, she would take you back home,
and you would not be here any more. If she would come to see it, all
right, but she would not--and so you would not see it either. Come
on, show me the lake you found."

Fleuriss was happy in a flash.
Laughing and dancing, she took her sister down to the lake and showed
her the wondrous fishes. They went in bathing together, and Eepersip
showed Fleuriss how to swim, as she had shown Toby. Fleuriss was wild
with joy. Then they splashed each other and played tag in the water.
Eepersip puzzled Fleuriss by swimming under water, and Fleuriss would
scream with delight when she came up in a totally unexpected place.
This new pastime kept them happy for several days.

But again
Fleuriss began to grow miserable--and homesick.

And again
Eepersip resisted this feeling for a long time--two or three weeks of
misery. But at the end of that time she began to think.

To begin
with, she thought about where she had been on that little expedition
of hers. She had been up toward those blue hills to see from nearer
the snowy mountains. She had loved them more and wanted more than ever
to go to them. She asked Fleuriss if she would not like to climb the
high peaks with her. But Fleuriss replied, almost snappishly: "You
know what I want, Eepersip."

Of course this misery weighed down
Eepersip's mind frightfully; she was very uncomfortable. And then she
began to think that after all she would want to be alone when she went
amongst the mountains; Fleuriss would be all right if she were happy,
perhaps, but a miserable companion would be unendurable. Perhaps she
had made a mistake in taking Fleuriss away. Maybe it was true that they
had to go in different directions--that she herself could not live at
home, and that her little sister could not live elsewhere. And even in
Eepersip's untamed heart there was a bit of pity. And she found that
that pity kept growing. How badly the Eigleens must feel, after all!
Once she smothered it with the thought, "No, she will be happy if she
stays long enough, and they will forget her." But it only began to
grow again.

Up to this unhappy time Fleuriss's flowers had not
withered or drooped: in this they were like those of Eepersip. But now
Eepersip noticed that for some peculiar reason hers only stayed fresh
and sweet. And then she thought again about the mountains and about
those poor wasted flowers, and the pity grew and grew.

And one
happy, happy day for Fleuriss, Eepersip led her safely home again.

"Good-bye, Fleuriss," she said. "I'm sorry you wouldn't stay with
me."

"Yes, I know, Eepersip, but I just couldn't. Why don't
you come home--you've been away so long--and Mother cries for you
still. Please come."

"Oh, Fleuriss, I _couldn't_. If I
were to go back home now, I should just die--even with you."

"Good-bye, then. Sometime I'm going to take Mother to see that
beautiful hill."

"But not for a long time?"

"As soon as I can."

"Don't."

"Why?"

"You know. Please don't."

"Well, I'm not sure. I'm going to--pretty soon.
Good-bye, Eepersip--Aren't you _ever_ coming home?"

"Oh, Fleuriss, no!"

"I wish you would."

"But I can't."

"Won't you let me take Mother and Daddy to live over there?"

"Well, after a while--if you want to. I shan't be there."

"Why, where are you going?"

"I'm going to the beautiful,
beautiful white mountains. And then maybe the sea again, Fleuriss--the
sea."

"Oo!"

"Coming?"

"NO! I'll ask Mother to take me to the sea. She will."

"Then--good-bye!"

And
she decked Fleuriss's fern dress with beautiful flowers--a crown of
them and a girdle. A sweet wind arose, carrying the scent of Eepersip's
flowers to Fleuriss. A few butterflies were blown over to her. Eepersip
stood on her tiptoes an instant: then, quick as a flash, she whirled
about and bounded off, free--relieved of a gigantic burden.</p> <hr>
<p>She went up to the lovely hill and stayed there a few days, amid the
dancing butterflies and the gorgeous roses. At the lake she would dream
hour after hour and watch the little jewelled minnows playing about
the white stones and shining pebbles. In the evening she crept into a
great bed of thick vines with flowers of white and gold, and listened
to the lapping of the waves and watched the twinkling fireflies. They
were her favourites, those poor ignorant little insects. She loved them
as well as the delicate, gauzy butterflies, the sweeping swallows with
their slim white wings, or the great gold-and-black bees. She adored
them all, but the tiny blue-black fireflies, with thin gauze wings and
the spot of phosphorescence showing now and then, were perhaps the
loveliest of all. How she liked to see them playing about at dusk,
sparkling and gleaming--little stars of the trees, in golden waves
across the sky.

Sometimes, when they began to come out, she
would go forth and dance and skip with myriads of them clustered in
her hair. Around each invisible fern and blossom in her dress would
gather a row of the little insects, until finally one could have seen
her entire form bordered with fireflies. And besides these which
alighted on her dress, thousands gathered swarming about her, so that
her head was entirely hidden in a maze of gold.

Sometimes she
would sleep at night and in the daytime play with the butterflies,
birds, and bees. But now she began to sleep more and more in the day
and play about at night.

One cool morning Eepersip went down
the lovely hill that she and Fleuriss had found. She walked down and
then out toward the pastured side of the hill. Here she stayed for a
long time. She lived in the golden smell of steeple-bush, and instead
of the wild strawberries that she had had on the hill she found great
crops of blueberries. And in this pasture she had a sample of a new
food--checkerberries. To be sure, she had eaten the leaves often
enough, but to see the waxen white berries was quite new. These also
she tasted and found greatly to her liking. She would lie and eat
hundreds of those white berries which tasted of the woods. They were
almost as good as the blueberries.

Now this pasture formed
a steep hill, and one delicious morning when a soft, warm wind was
blowing rather strongly, Eepersip climbed to the top of it. And oh,
what a sight met her dark brown eyes! Far and near, far and near rose
mountains, mountains, mountains! Stretching away, fold after fold,
layer after layer, rose marvellous blue peaks, with the dazzling light
of the sun brightening the white granite at some of their tops. Peak
after peak rose up around her, lake after lake stretched out in the dim
blue distance, with the sun striking them until they were a mass of
gold, like great precious stones in that setting of purple mountains.
She could make out three or four farmhouses, but no villages. She stood
there entranced, watching.

Then down she dashed, through the
tall grass sprinkled with buttercups and daisies. It seemed miles. but
it also seemed no more than seconds. At last she found herself by the
shore of a cobalt lake. It was almost perfectly round, with a group of
tiny green islets sprinkled in it like a handful of emerald beads. No
house could Eepersip see, for the lake was entirely surrounded with low
green-blue hills. The shore was for the most part soft white sand, fine
as pepper. With a cry of joy at the discovery of this beautiful little
lake Eepersip dashed into it and swam in the cool of those waters from
the mountains. And then she saw, playing up and down in the shallow
water just off one of those many beaches, a shoal of slim fishes.
They were all silver except one or two that were gold, and they had
rather bulging red eyes.

For a long time Eepersip watched them.
Then something caused her to look up. This something was the strange,
shrill cry of a bird above her. She looked up suddenly and saw the
bird. But she did not watch it, for the glint of something white--a
strange whiteness which she had never seen before--caught her eye.
She gazed long upon it, until, when her eyes became accustomed, she
was able to make out the outline of a peak, going up sharp as a tooth,
with bumps of smoother outline stretching away, away into the blue
immensity of space on either side.

"Oh," said Eepersip, " a
dream! Oh, what a beautiful dream! But--I feel so wide awake."

She gazed and gazed, silent.

"Oh," she said again, after
a while, "it cannot be a dream, it mustn't be a dream!"

She
gazed and gazed again.

"Oh," she repeated, "I must go there at
once! The snowy mountains!"

She plunged into the beautiful,
icy lake and swam across it with never a thought of the beauty in
the green depths around her. Her eyes were fixed upon that one thing
only. Soon she reached the opposite shore, consisting only of thick
woods. Her heart--that heart beautiful, yet with a certain sense of
childlikeness in it which had never left her--was mad for a glimpse
of those mountains. It was then that she felt as if there were a great
bird in her, pulling her, hauling her forward, regardless of the thorns
and nettles which tore her delicate dress of ferns and blossoms. At
last she got through the forest and found herself in an open meadow,
with the wondrous mountain before her and warm rain falling gently.
She saw a farmhouse, and as she went along the simple peasant farmer
saw her and muttered to his wife: "Look there, Mary." Mary looked, and
then she said: "Ay, God hath taken this child into his care--ignorance
demands mercy."

A moment of intense thought. She gazed and
gazed, bewitched. Then she gave, or tried to give, a little laugh.
It did not sound. "Oh," she tried to say, "how _queer_ I feel!
I believe I never felt so queer." And indeed she did feel queer. For
she felt the feeling of speaking to her heart. She was talking, it
seemed to her, loudly, but when, even in the midst of her talk, she
listened, nothing sounded.

After a few seconds, it seemed, she
ran on, leaping through the wet. Raindrops gathered on the ferns and
the flowers of her dress, outlining them with the pearly water. She
looked like a rain-fairy. Hour after hour passed, and she went like
the wind itself; yet she did not tire. At last she found herself near
the foot of that wondrous mountain, shimmering with snow-fields, cold
white against a deepening night sky.

That night a bird of modest
wood-colour, with speckled breast, sang of moonlight; and, rippling
faintly, softly, came echoes from his silver-tongued mate. They sang,
and they answered, and the moon-frost-tipped pines were quiet, and
clouds floated near, snowy palaces of silence. Spellbound, Eepersip
was borne away to fairy kingdoms where she danced and where
birds sang the only melody in the world.

The next morning
the sun came out and shone through every raindrop in splendid crimsons
and purple-greens. Eepersip looked about her and discovered a little
plant with a peculiar flower of white and crimson. She found that its
leaves were quite delicious, unlike anything that she had had in the
meadow or by the shore of the sea. They were green--a strange pale
green, delicately outlined and veined in marble white and pale gold.
Eepersip loved their pleasant flavour, but could not bear to touch
them, they were so beautiful.

Then she looked up and beheld the
strange rough outline of the mountain, and far in the distance, almost
on the top, was a great snow-field, on which the sun shone directly,
covering it incredibly with brilliant tints and shades of gold. And,
oh, the bright green foliage, shining in the dear golden light!

"Fairyland!" whispered Eepersip. "I loved the meadow, I loved the
sea more, but even before I am really _in_ the mountains, I love
them the best of all." Then, after a pause, she added: "That snow-field
of gold, these heavenly little flowers--oh, such beauty!"

After
a few more moments of breathless gazing, gazing upon everything, she
started up the mountain. The first few hundred yards she followed
a faintly marked trail which led through dense woods, over great
boulders covered with dark green moss. Occasionally a little rushing
brook trickled across her path. For quite a way Eepersip kept climbing
over the huge boulders, and the path was very mossy. After a while it
began to grow fainter and harder to follow, and at last it was shut
off entirely by the thick bushes and trees which surrounded it. Here
she sat down to rest and to think a while.

She looked about and
came upon a bubbling spring, at which she drank. No water she had ever
found was like this. It tasted of the strong, delicious mountain air.
She drank deeply, and, when she had quenched her thirst, continued
her way. Here flowers which made her think of foam at sea--white,
star-like, with silver-tipped petals--twined themselves among the
trees mingled with wild roses--dawn-flowers of deep pink or sun-bright
yellow. Strange orchids grew about, many of them pure white and
fringed like fluffy clouds. One had green blossoms with long whitish
spurs--mystic flowers on tall spikes with two smooth leaves. Yellow
lady-slippers made her think of butterflies with folded wings, or of
the sun peeping out from dark clouds. But the loveliest of all were
pink orchids--hosts of them with more deeply tinted lips fringed
like fairies' fingers: hosts of them on slender stems, each stem a
dawn-sprite's wand.

"Like the dawn I saw once," she thought,
"when snow-pink fringey flowers wreathed the sky. The sun was pleased
and smiled. I danced for him, and the bobolinks and skylarks greeted
him with song." There were tall flowers, too, pink silk beneath white
tissue, with very dark and curious leaves up the stalks among the
blossoms. Butterflies were playing like sun rays, winging softly from
flower to flower. And as she went on she passed through forests of
thick bushes and poisonous thorns, open pine-groves, and great pastures
smelling of hay-scented ferns and budding steeple-bush. All the time
the path, or rather the easiest way through the thick bushes, had been
fairly level, but now it began to shoot up steeply, and it was all
Eepersip could do to keep herself from sliding back in an avalanche of
pebbles and stones. A bit of tough scrambling followed, and at last
she broke out on a comparatively level piece of ground. on one side
of which was a deep ravine in which she heard a brook rushing and
rippling. On the other side of the ravine was a peak of the mountain,
crowned with snow and with the sun flashing upon it.

Eepersip
longed to see the brook, which, by the sound, she judged to be quite
large. She was not actually afraid to go down over those steep walls
of dirt and sand, but she _was_ rather afraid that, once being
down, she would not be able to get up again. So on she went, and it
grew so steep that, even by digging her feet into every crevice and
clutching the roots of the trees, which were getting much scarcer and
more stunted, she could just manage to cling on.

But at last
a change came. She stood on that high peak, on which there were only
bare rocks and a little snow, no roots or plants. On either side it
went down, down, and it was getting late in the afternoon. She could
see nothing to do. Still the highest peak was many miles ahead, and
she knew that she could not make it in the remaining daylight. So
she climbed warily down into a little crevice, where a few ferns and
luscious mountain blueberries managed to grow. She ate a supper of
these and of another hardy little berry which she found; then slept in
peace till daybreak, her tired mind dreaming of strange things--of
deep palaces at the bottom of the sea and snow palaces at the tops
of the mountains; of fairies, nymphs, and elves.

In the
morning she breakfasted on the mountain blueberries again, and found,
much to her delight, that they quenched her thirst almost as well as
water. After her juicy breakfast she went on down for about a mile;
then up, up again on sheer walls of rock, where there was not a sign
of a plant of any kind. After a stretch of difficult climbing snow
again began to appear, as the slope became more level. Eepersip went
down through a snug hollow in the rocks, where it was thick with small,
scrubby trees and where very little snow had managed to penetrate the
thick branches.

Oh, but it was cold up here on these tremendous
heights; the wind was keen and shrilly whistling. But, however cold,
it was a mountain wind, an exhilarating mountain wind which made
Eepersip leap into the air--leap and dance as on the meadow. Then,
after she had rested a while under the welcome branches of the stunted
firs and eaten tart mountain blueberries again, she went on, up out
of the hollow and on to the solid rock covered with a deep snow, into
which she sank at every step. Another mile she trudged. along, pulling
herself through it. And still the mighty peak retreated before her, so
that she could make no progress--or, at least, it seemed so. It seemed
as far away and as faint in the snowy distance as from where she had
been when the night had come on--a dreaming peak caressed with fingers
of mist.

At last the ground went up abruptly again. However
steep, Eepersip found it much easier, being there wasn't so much snow.
It rose and rose, becoming more gradual, until she stood on another
high peak, looking off over a tremendous range of mountains. Large
flakes of snow were falling gently, so that she could not see much of
these. She thought that she was now on the highest peak, and she sat
down to wait for the snow to cease and give her a clear view. After a
time it did; and then, and not until then, she saw another peak, the
true summit of the mountain, going up, up, and up on the other side of
a deep valley into which she would have to descend. After sucking a
few handfuls of the pure mountain snow, she set off with a light heart
and a happy spirit, her feet falling fast through the light drifts.
After a while she got down into the valley; and here she came upon a
brooklet full of icicles, winding through the long ravine and dashing
over the green slimy rocks in great cascades of rattling icicles and
foam. Eepersip drank deeply, and was refreshed.

Then, after
resting a few moments, she went on, up that steep wall of snow and
rock which would take her to the longed-for summit. Eepersip counted
sixteen brooklets rushing down over it, carrying hundreds of icicles
with their currents, foaming and dashing with spray and myriads of
shiny iridescent bubbles.

Across brook after brook she went,
watching the colours change in the dazzling snowflakes. The sun was
shining brilliantly now, making everything unimaginably beautiful in
magnificent shades of ruby, copper, silver-gold, emerald, and sapphire.
Each snowflake seemed covered with an almost invisible layer of tiny
sparkling gems. And once, when Eepersip sat down in a deep snow-bank
to watch and to rest, the sun happened to strike directly on one of
the many brooklets that went dashing down the mountain-side, making it
a blinding ribbon of silver and gold. Occasionally Eepersip saw the
blossoms of the beautiful talatuna, with ruby-red leaves and blossoms
of pale green and changing white. She thought that the leaves were
_all_ red, but when the wind flipped one over she saw that their
backs were moon-white, pale but glistening. 

On she went,
through the incredible beauty of the fairyland about her. "Oh," she
murmured to herself, "how marvellous it is! Oh, fairies, fairies." She
whirled happily around. She had felt a few delicate touches on her
shoulders, and at once the air was a-flock with glistening snowflakes.
Each fern in her dress was bordered with a row of the fairy things,
and her autumn hair was crowned white.

After a while a slight
breeze sprang up and the big flakes whirled faster. The breeze rose and
rose until it was a strong, cold wind, and she could not see a foot
before her. The only thing to do was to wait for clear weather. But
in that she was disappointed, for it was growing darker and darker,
and at last she realized that night was coming on. So she lay down and
ate a supper of snow, as it fell and fell.

All night the
snow whirled and whirled, and in the morning Eepersip was completely
buried. It was a long, hard task to find her way out, or rather to push
her way out, for almost as fast as the snow fell it froze into ice,
so that there was on top of Eepersip a thick layer of ice. But just
before she decided to give up and wait for warmer weather, she broke
through. Out into the bright sunlight she came; and lo and behold! all
the ferns on her dress, and the dainty blossoms, together with her
hair, were covered with a layer of ice which shimmered and sparkled
in the sun like jewels set in something brighter than the brightest
gold.

But as soon as she came out into the sun the ice began
to melt and run off in all directions, and as she skipped and jumped
about she was almost hidden in the shower of water-drops which flew
from her as she ran.

And how beautiful, how fairy-like, she
was! Each fern was covered with a thin layer of the melting ice, and
the crown of pink blossoms around her curly hair was frozen likewise,
their fair colour persisting through the ice. Once in a while, when
the sun touched her, she was a blaze of colour--of silver and gold,
with here and there a splotch of brilliant red as the sun struck a red
flower.

After she had found that there was nothing to be eaten
except snow, she sucked a few handfuls, flavoured with the petals
of the flowers which she wore. Then she went on, through paradises
of silver, gold, and red, through deep hollows of shining green.
Everything was something besides white, and the world that was in
Eepersip's range of vision was fairyland.

But, as she went on,
clouds began to float in--little white clouds. They grew thicker and
thicker, until, before she had come near the highest peak, there was
nothing but pearly mist--scudding grey mist, curling into fantastic
shapes as it rose. She could see nothing, and she sat down in the snow
to wait. That night a gale came up, whistling and howling around the
peaks, reminding Eepersip of that storm at sea. What an awesome sound
it made! It sleeted, too, and when she awoke the next morning the snow
was covered with a crust. The mist had partly cleared, and she pushed
on again. She went through icy hollows and up on shimmering peaks,
until, finally, she saw near her that long-sought summit, and, with a
shout of joy, she dashed up. Fast she went, but when she really reached
it at last, the mist had closed in again, the wind was up, and it was
sleeting furiously. It was only through a break in the mist that she
had made the summit at all.

The next morning it was still
misty, but not nearly so thick. There was even a faint purple glow
over on the eastern horizon where the sun was rising. Occasionally
the mist would break open above, and she would see glimpses of blue
sky--the deep, deep blue of that day in the meadow with Fleuriss. And
lying all around on the boulders were frost-feathers. When Eepersip
first saw them she thought that she was dreaming. But no, they were
really there, delicate ferns and feathers with scalloped edges--ferns
and feathers of frost.

"Oh, mountain-fairies--fairies have
left them here," she said quietly. Some were as long as her forearm,
and others tiny--oh, so tiny; some were almost round like the inner
feathers of a bird, and others long and narrow like the outer plumes.
Down in a hollow were some stunted firs, laden with snow and covered
with those fronds of ivory chiselled by wind-sprites, lovelier than
anything Eepersip had ever seen, lovelier than anything ever made by
Nature. No, Nature could never have carved them, Eepersip thought.
The fairies--fairies!

Once she found a hollowed rock entirely
lined with them, like a fairy's crystal palace with strange shadowy
recesses. They crowded everywhere they could find room, and sometimes,
when there was no other place, rippled on the snow. They overlapped on
the rocks, and hung from windward crags, pointing into the wind. And
behold! Eepersip's dress and her head were covered with small ones,
like a diadem--a fairy crown and fairy ornaments. Moving gently,
so as not to disturb them from where they rested, she wandered from
one cluster to another, looking carefully at each one, noting each
special pattern, each magic tracery. All day she followed the winding
rabbit-trails amid the feathery firs.

The sun, too, had been
pushing out. Now the mist opened in one direction, and Eepersip caught
a fleeting glimpse of snowy peaks; but it closed again. It opened
a trifle longer in another direction, and Eepersip saw, 'way down
below, first low blue-green foothills and lakes golden with the sun,
then higher purple hills, melting into range after range of billowing
mountains, and valley after valley filled with white clouds rapidly
lifting. The mist shut in. Another direction opened in the same way,
with hills fading into mountains; and far off on the horizon was
another range of snow mountains, lying just under great white clouds.
There were clouds hanging over the valleys too, and they cast strange
shadows on the sunlit trees far below. When the mist shut in, the
golden lakes seemed to stay the longest. and after the mountains had
entirely disappeared they could he seen as if hanging in mid-air,
limpid pools of gold. And more sides opened, and more, the waits
growing shorter in between, until, on a gust of mountain wind, the last
of the mist went scudding away, banished, and the sun broke out into
the blue sky. The snow sparkled, the mountains sparkled, the lakes and
rivers sparkled, the frost-feathers sparkled, the air itself sparkled.
And the mountains of the range that Eepersip was in, crowned with
snow, gleamed like gold. Down on one side of the snowy peak dashed a
great river, green and swirling, covered with clots of foam. Sometimes
it would cascade over the rocks throwing up a fountain of spray, and
sometimes it would slip over a smooth slide, then, whirling round and
round in a rock basin, thunder down another great cliff in a shower
of bubbles, rattling icicles, and foam. It not its way through a
green hollow in the snow, and where it tunnelled under the snow-hanks
it was overhung with long, gleaming icicles.

Eepersip danced
in the snow, among the frost-feathers, all that day--danced like a
mountain sprite, leaping high, then running gracefully in a shower of
water-drops which flew from her as the frost-feathers melted in the
warmth of the sunlight. She danced down to the river and played there
a while--played with the white foam.

At sunset she was again
at the peak of her mountain. The sky was flushed with magic; a great
cloud in the west became a brilliantly fringed with gold and red-gold,
the east was all submerged in a lilac sea, and a delicate laciness
of pink trailed across the zenith. Sunset fairies alighted on the
snow-peaks: they were fiery for a moment, and all the great snow-fields
were flaming. Then the colour faded to pink on the summits. But in
the sky Nature still flung about her colours wildly--fire was in the
zenith, the long bank of clouds was vividly fringed with red-gold, and
there to the south it changed to caverns of shadowed pink and strange
violet. Seas and bays and cloud islands formed out of it--seas of
a strange greenish rose. Then one thrill and flame of gold spread
about the whole earth; the snow at her feet was shadowy gold, and a
pathway of it danced upon the air 'way to the horizon. It played upon
each frost-feather; the eastern mountains were flushed with this soft
gold.

And then, dizzy with the colour and the beauty, Eepersip
fell asleep, her fingers clutching the rosy snow.

The next morning the frost-feathers had almost disappeared underneath a
new snowfall. The air was full of its fresh scent, as it came down
gently in tremendous flakes. Here and there Eepersip saw one of the
lovely blossoms of the talatuna, with those same ruby-red leaves. How
beautiful they were, growing in great clusters, just peeping through
the snow! Once in a while a pale cream-coloured mountain moth would
flit before her. Occasional gusts brought swarms of tiny bottle-green,
white-winged snow-beetles, and the air was a-buzz with them. Sometimes
a blue or white insect like a firefly would hover past, a strange red
light gleaming about its transparent body.

On and on Eepersip explored, seeing nothing but the wonderland about her--the
fairy palaces of snow, the fluttering, hovering insects, and the beautiful
mountain flowers. Following the icy river down, she came sometimes to a
great cascade of the green water--a cascade coming over one of those
great cliffs, washing down the snow, throwing up fountains and clouds
of spray in its furious descent. Sometimes it cut under the banks,
making a green cave hung with icicles gleaming strangely. One of these
had been made when the river was in flood; now it was large enough for
Eepersip to stand in, and, wading in water about up to her knees, she
went back into its innermost recesses, where the roar of the stream was
muffled. There were fish there--trout playing in the whirlpools and
riding swiftly with the current. She found some odd bright stones and
gleaming pebbles in this mysterious place, silent save for the deadened
rush of water.

Sometimes, again, the rushing brook took such
steep course that Eepersip was forced to make a detour into the woods
for a little way, through clumps of the firs, now growing less stunted,
but hung with icicles which clicked together in the wind, sounding to
Eepersip like fairy castanets. Even at this high altitude, she saw
occasionally a white pine, each cluster of pale green needles laden
with snow--tufts of snow which seemed to make little faces peering
out from the tree. Bursts of happiness would overwhelm her now and
then, and she would leap high and dart like some frightened deer or
mountain nymph.

Once she found beautiful little violet-shaped
pink flowers with bowed heads and feathery leaves--snow-pinks blooming
there, thrusting their buds from the snow itself. She tucked a spray
of them into her dress of fluttering ferns.

And then she would
return to the river and follow it again. When the moon came, dappling
the foamy water with silver, she watched it as it dipped down its
forehead in the stream and touched the treetops with magic. Then she
would go on again through the moonlit night. Once she came to a place
where the brook separated, and she had a difficulty choosing which
branch to follow.

And when the russet dawn reappeared, tipping
the mountains with apple-blossom and fire, she had followed it to its
goal in the very meadow from where she had started--a pool hitherto
unseen by her. About a hundred feet across it was, beached with clean
white pebbles. In it bloomed water-lilies, fragrant and white, with
centres of gold; strange red flowers, too, she saw on the bottom,
growing between the pebbles. Dragonflies with crackling wings swept
over it in circles. She saw, too, a shoal of tiny fishes of a brownish
colour, striped with yellow. They would suddenly dart forward as if
something had frightened them, and then poise themselves stock-still,
mimicking so many sticks in the shadows of the abundant lily-pads.

She was wading about in the pool when suddenly--where there had
been ground for her foot to rest on, nothing was there. The bottom
of the pool under her foot had slid forward and collapsed! Suddenly
"Clug-glug, clug-glug, chugarum, glug!" reached her, as a big
bull-frog's nose appeared by the side of a lily-pad. A second later the
frog diked up on the lily-pad and stared at Eepersip with his goggly
eyes. She burst out laughing, he looked so ridiculous staring at her
like that.

She stayed in the meadow, playing gaily among the
leaves and flowers. Butterflies of all the colours of the rainbow swept
over it in great flocks. Flowers bloomed so thickly that there was
hardly any grass--white ones with waxen petals. striped and bordered
with heavy golden bands; red ones with centres of dark green-gold;
great blossoms of pink and purple, whose petals fluttered about in the
breeze like butterflies. 

One morning she was awakened early by
"Peep, peep, twitter-itter-ee-e-e-e-e-e, twit chirup, twitter-ee-e-e,
twit!" She looked up and saw a great flock of snow-white birds with
long narrow wings. They were flying northward. The flock was much
more gigantic than Eepersip had supposed, for it kept on until she
began to think that it was going round and round. But no: after ten
or fifteen minutes the sky cleared, and she heard faintly in the
distance: "Twitter-itter-ee-e-e-e-e, _ee-e-per-s-sip!_ e-e-p,
e-ep, chirup."

Day after day she danced here, playing, as on
the first meadow, the butterflies, flowers, and swallows. And now,
as she danced, she seemed to float through the air, her feet almost
motionless. Sometimes she would leap high and come down--_float_
down--quite slowly. She seemed to have no weight at all, and a breeze
would almost lift her off the ground and hold her up in the air.
Indeed, when she ran with the wind behind her she would be _blown_
along--blown like a leaf just above the flowers.

One day
she was dancing there--dancing and leaping in the long grass, amid
the blossoms. Butterflies drifted over the sunny field--butterflies
of red and yellow, blue and green, black and white, orange and purple.
How gracefully they flew; how delicately they alighted on the flowers;
how fairy-like they were, hovering for an instant over some blossom,
then dipping their wings and starting off again! Eepersip felt as
though--as though she were going to be one of them; as though she were
so happy that she must fly about with them, sip the honey from the
flowers with them.

As she was thinking happily she heard a few
faint peeps, which became louder as she danced toward a certain part of
the field. Then there was a desperate twitter right at her feet, and,
looking down she saw a yellow fledgling hopping towards her. She picked
him up carefully and saw that he had broken his left wing. She worked
a moment with her hands and pulled the bone into place. Then she made
him a comfortable nest of grass and set out to see where he had come
from. Looking up, she saw a nest from which a bird was peering about
anxiously. Straightway she took the little one from the nest _she_
had made, and climbed the tree with it to its own nest; upon which the
mother-bird gave a twitter of joy.

After doing this Eepersip
descended the tree and continued her happy dance with the butterflies
until evening. Then they all found shelters under the leaves, and the
stars came out, one by one. Presently Eepersip spied a flicker in the
meadow--then another and still another, until the fireflies were
out in full play. They gathered around Eepersip in one flaming mass,
kissing her with their feathery wings. Making her way over to the pool,
she saw her reflection, a shimmer of gold.

A light darted out
toward her from the woods; then another and yet another, until there
were hundreds of lights flickering and blinking at her from all corners
of the great field--the lights of elves and gnomes, little fairies
of the field. And she danced happily among them--danced until the
dawn appeared on the horizon, sending away the darkness and making
the stars fade into space. It flushed the whole sky with rose, sent
arms of it even as far as the west; arms and streamers of colour which
paled toward their tips. Little white clouds grew pink, too, and the
colour was reflected on the distant mountain-tops. Again the snow-field
seemed to become fire--fire which was soon quenched by the coolness
of the snow. As the sun sent its first golden beams above the horizon,
the colour faded, turned to yellow, and soon entirely disappeared.
Then the sky was blue--deep, quivering blue, with the fluffy clouds
like pearls in an azure setting.

Suddenly Eepersip saw that
she was dressed in a flouncy array of spring crocuses and maidenhair
ferns. Lovely flowers of pink and yellow were entwined in her hair, and
butterflies fluttered around her. She danced happily and leaped high
in the air. How free and light she felt in the lovely dress that had
been given her!

That day Eepersip was even happier than usual.
She floated about, visiting each flower, each bush and tree. She played
games with the butterflies, the games she had played on the old meadow,
that first summer of her life in the House without Windows. When she
rested, she sat on top of a laurel-bush, and not a twig bent beneath
her. The slightest breeze blew her about, changed the direction of
her dance. Butterfly after butterfly flew to her, flock after flock,
as if they had some message to tell her; and after each visit she was
happier than before. Yes, they were messengers, these happy creatures;
messengers who came to whisper her a secret--a secret from Nature,
a secret of the beautiful meadow, a secret from the fairies.

And, when the sun again tinged the sky with colour, a flock of these
butterflies, of purple and gold and green, came swooping and alighted
on her head in a circle, the largest in front. Others came in myriads
and covered her dress with delicate wing-touches. Eepersip held out
her arms a moment. A gold-and-black one alighted on each wrist. And
then--she rose into the air, and, hovering an instant over a great
laurel-bush, vanished.

She was a fairy--a wood-nymph. She would
be invisible for ever to all mortals, save those few who have minds
to believe, eyes to see. To these she is ever present, the spirit of
Nature--a sprite of the meadow, a naiad of lakes, a nymph of the
woods.



HISTORICAL NOTE
_(By Another Hand)_

In the opening week of January, 1923, there appeared on the outside of
a certain door within a dingy, sunless, and cramped apartment a slip
of paper bearing the following typewritten notice:

Nobody may come into this room if the door is shut tight (if it is
shut not quite latched it is all right) without knocking. The person
in the room if he agrees that one shall come in will say "come in," or
something like that and if he does not agree to it he will say "Not
yet, please," or something like that. The door may be shut if nobody
is in the room but if a person wants to come in, knocks and hears no
answer that means that there is no one in the room and he must not go
in.

Reason. If the door is shut tight and a person is in the
room the shut door means that the person in the room wishes to be left
alone. The author of this odd manifesto (here reproduced with strict
textual exactitude from the frayed original) was the author of the
foregoing story, then just three months short of nine years old. The
door on which it appeared was that of the room in which, on a small
typewriter, she wrote down the adventures of Eepersip; and the week
in which it appeared was that in which these adventures had their
beginning.

She finished them, in the same room,
three months later, early in the March of her ninth completed year and
a few days after her birthday. One of her curious, slightly un-American
inventions, I must here explain, was the concept of her own birthday
as an annual occasion for handing out things to the other members of
her family. She planned this story from the beginning as a gift for her
mother on March 4. Would her mother "like" it, though? On that point
there would have to be a disinterested opinion--as it happened, mine.
With intense secrecy, behind the latched door of that room guarded
by the constrained preparatory notice, she read me the instalments
as they were produced.

My candid guess was that her mother
would indeed "like" it. I liked it myself, if only as unconscious
expression of a radiant physical vitality--so much I found in it of
the mighty swimmer, the enjoyable young comrade of trail and river,
always ready to swing a paddle tirelessly or carry ungrumbling a full
fair share of pack. I liked it, too, as her answer to the one year
which she had ever been called upon to spend in undeniably tawdry
surroundings. But, alas, there came interruptions one of them in the
shape of the only appreciable illness she has ever had--and these
pulled down her average daily output. On her big days the small typist
clicked off fresh copy to the extent of from four to five thousand
words; but still the appointed morning caught her some pages short of
the end. The tale came to Finis a few days later. Its length, in that
first incarnation, was some 40,000 words, or not far from what it is
now.

Up to that point there had been, of course, no thought of
print. It was I who introduced the question of print; and it had at
that time no connection whatever with publication. The author of the
story never had (and never has) experienced any school system, public
or private, her education having been exclusively the home-made one
devised by her mother; and I was beginning to think it high time that
print became a part of it. It was, in fine, my idea that we ought to
have a piece of her work put into type in some small shop where she
could set part of it herself, pull her own proofs, learn more about
proof-reading by correcting them, and see the whole thing through to
the binding of a small armful of copies for her friends.

But
before anything of that sort was done I wanted her to have the practice
of revising her first copy as carefully as possible and putting it
into strictly printable condition--as, indeed, she was eager to do.
Accordingly she took it away with her in the summer, worked on it from
early July through September in the intervals of swimming, canoeing,
mountain-climbing, and plain day-dreaming, and brought it back, on
the 5th of October, 1923, ready for print. Twenty-four hours later we
left it in a burning building from which nothing got out but the lucky
human occupants.

From the point of view of an admittedly
fond parent--for I can make no slightest pretension to the ability to
contemplate all this with a stranger's or a critic's detachment--it
was heart-rending to watch the nine-year-old author torture her memory
to the end of reconstituting the tale in its first shape. There were,
during the next weeks, a good many blank hours at the typewriter, and
it was slowly and painfully that page followed page. At this rate, it
was going to take about three years merely to salvage what had once
been manufactured out of the void in three months.

Then, one day
in December, everything was suddenly different. As an experiment of
despair, Barbara had stopped trying to remember the shape of sentences,
the precise order and phraseology of details, and had begun to let the
material come back as it listed. And to her astonishment it came in a
freshet, like northern rivers when the ice goes out. When, a few days
later, we put work aside to organize our makeshift Christmas, she was
still in a happy glow, the first third of the fantasy existed again,
and the story was running over its banks.

There followed one
interruption after another, and it was not until the autumn of 1924
that the second draft was completed. In the late winter of 1924-25,
Barbara worked patiently through the first third, putting it in what
she hoped would be final shape. The manuscript had to be laid away
in May of 1925, and was not touched again for nine months. Then, in
February and March, 1926, she did her revision of the second and third
parts, made a few minor improvements in Part I, and typed out a fair
copy of the whole--the copy from which this little book is set.

To what extent is this twelve-year-old manuscript identical with the
nine-year-old story? To a far greater extent, I am sure, than seems
compatible with the huge number of hours spent on it since it was
completed; for it happens that a disproportionate number of those
hours has gone into laborious, at times unconscious, recovery of the
precise effects which were in the lost original. The differences are
not where a stranger to the author would naturally look for them: that
is, in the diction and the build of sentences. Barbara's vocabulary
at nine was, of course, a stratified arrangement of deposits from
Walter de la Mare[2][3][4] and Mark Twain, Shelley
and Scott; that is to say, it was just what it is now except for the
later addition of words which could not be in this story anyhow--the
words of history, of science. And certainly the fundamental ideas
and emotions of the story have undergone no change. The fact is,
it was conceived and written at the end of a phase which could not
return--that phase of normal childhood in which nature means nearly
everything and civilization nearly nothing. The whole purport of
Eepersip's existence is simply a healthy nine-year-old consciousness
made articulate--something that an eleven-year-old could recover
only by a feat of the memory, and an adult mind only by an improbable
_tour de force_ of the imagination. Barbara, in short, designed
this curious narrative at the last moment when to do so would have
been at all open to her. By no human possibility could it have been in
her head at eleven if she had not had it down on paper at nine.

[1][2][3] No books meant more to her, between the ages of six and ten,
than The Three Mulla-Mulgars, _A Little Boy Lost_, and The Princess and
the Goblin

The chief differences, then, between the printed and the destroyed
versions represent the inevitable development of the author's taste
in minor particulars, and they are these: (1) There is appreciably
less of the pursuit-and-escape device, and correspondingly more of the
sheer revelling in natural beauty; (2) a great many exact measurements,
in the form of dates, distances, rates, heights, and depths, have
been omitted as realistic and therefore trivializing; (3) there is a
somewhat maturer attempt to keep the fauna and flora consistent with
latitude, altitude, and season; and (4) the lapse of time is managed
rather more consciously and coherently than it was in the first place.
If, in the treatment of these and other details of the story, there
seems to he a progressive increase in maturity, that is a consequence
and a measure of the nine months' interval between the author's
revision of Part I and her revision of Parts II and III.

It
will be observed that the differences involve little or no addition.
The one piece of addition is in the episode of Eepersip's young sister
Fleuriss, which is considerably more developed. The obvious reason for
this is that the author's own young sister, at the time of the first
draft, existed only as an insistent demand on Barbara's part; whereas
in the period of the revision she was a dream fulfilled, subject to
adoring daily observation.

As to ordinary literacy, there is
no perceptible difference, and has been none since the typewritten
by-products of Barbara's sixth and seventh years. In short, what
the reader is here given is an articulate eight and nine-year-old
child's outpouring of her own dreams and longings in a fanciful tale,
superficially revised by the hand of a twelve-year-old girl whose
life on its more artificial side is made up principally of books and
music.

It was the youthful author's idea, not mine, that
her story should be accompanied by a word of explanation from her
father. I do not know how, when, or exactly why she formulated such a
requirement, any more than I can explain where she got many another
of the ideas with which she has been known to startle or confound me.
Long after the story had been completed and while it was undergoing
revision, there arrived a day on which I was told that the requirement
existed: that Barbara had secretly been counting on me, and with
pleasure in the thought. Pleasure! If I could give that and so easily,
and to her, it not mine to make a gesture of resistance. I insist only
that what I have to say shall be placed where it can stand between
no reader and the story.

It would be neither good manners nor
good sense for me to attempt any sort of appraisal of this chronicle
of Eepersip's adventures in the spacious rooms of her House without
Windows. I have been too near to the whole thing, and am too near
the chronicler. The most that I can now add without impropriety is
a statement of why the first thought, a book to be manufactured but
by no means published, gave way after all to a different idea.

It began to strike me that here was something representatively
valuable--valuable, I mean, as a representation of something lovely in
generalized childhood itself--and yet not so very likely to achieve
frequent expression. The fact is that the impulses crystallized in this
story mostly fade into the light of common day a year or two before
the dawn of that amount of mechanical articulacy which is necessary
for a tangible expression of them; and they are therefore almost never
expressed. Actually, I do not happen to be acquainted with a single
prose document of much scope which achieves the full expression, or any
first-hand expression, of what in a normal, healthy child's mind and
heart during that mysterious phase when butterflies, flowers, winging
swallow, and white-tapped waves are twice as real as even a quite
bearable parent, and incomparably more important--the phase before
there is any unshakable Tyranny of Things.

What is probably
unusual about Barbara is the conspiracy of the circumstances which
have made these two things, the phase and the necessary articulacy,
overlap. She is precocious, and the phase may have lasted a year or
two longer than it does in many. She is not excessively gregarious and
has not been regimented in schools and groups; therefore nothing has
as yet standardized her, or ironed out her spontaneity, or made her
particularly ashamed of it. She has been given plenty of time to know
herself. And, almost above all, having used a typewriter as a plaything
from a time that she can't remember, she was able to rattle off an
easy 1200 words an hour, with any awareness of the physical process,
years before penmanship could have developed half the proficiency, even
with intense concentration on the physical process alone.

I
formed, then, the opinion that her Eepersip, who lives an ardent life
of three or four years in nearly every child's consciousness, lives
not at all anywhere no the world's multitude of books. And it came to
seem to me that this Eepersip very possibly has something to say to you
about your children, and about yourself of a time that you may easily
have forgotten, as well as, perhaps, to your children directly.

A last point: Barbara has been given by her parents, in the final
preparation of this manuscript, exactly what help she has asked for.
That is not nearly so much help as many an adult author often has from
us, for there is not one idea or structural change of ours in the
entire story. But I see no value in withholding solicited advice in
order to make a Roman holiday for those who like to chuckle or guffaw
over infantile slips in spelling and grammar. Barbara, whose spelling
and grammarhappen to be very reliable, would want us to straighten
them out for her if they weren't; and we should do it. When she asks
whether a comma will do or ought it to be a semi-colon? we answer as
well as we can. When she wants to know: "have I made it clear what
this means?" or "Have I used this word twice too near together?" of
course we say how it strikes us. Annoyingly from my Yankee point of
view, she insists on a preference for Oxford spelling, undoubtedly
met in three out of four of the contemporary books which she reads.
Well, then, I point out to her that if going to spell "colour" she,
must also spell "favourite" and "storey" and "veranda." But the words
themselves, the sentences, are hers, just as truly as is the pattern
of the whole; and hers is a really workmanlike care for weeding out
gawky constructions and repetitions of the words of which she ins been
successively over-fond.

One of the great objects of imaginative
writing, I take it, is to have joy. Another, not wholly separable from
the first, is to learn as you go. I like to suppose that Barbara,
just turned twelve, is having her just share of both.

Wilson Follett

March, 1926





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE WITHOUT WINDOWS & EEPERSIP'S LIFE THERE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


