The Project Gutenberg eBook of Household words, no. 306, February 2, 1856
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Household words, no. 306, February 2, 1856
        A weekly journal

Author: Charles Dickens

Release date: February 11, 2025 [eBook #75344]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Office, 1856

Credits: EdFo186 and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOUSEHOLD WORDS, NO. 306, FEBRUARY 2, 1856 ***





     “_Familiar in their Mouths as HOUSEHOLD WORDS._”--SHAKESPEARE.

                            HOUSEHOLD WORDS.

                           A WEEKLY JOURNAL.
                     CONDUCTED BY CHARLES DICKENS.

 N^{o.} 306.]      SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 1856.      {Price 2_d._
                                                    {Stamped 3_d._




TABLE OF CONTENTS

 BEEF.
 ADVENTURES OF A RUSSIAN SOLDIER.
 P.N.C.C.
 LAVATER’S WARNING.
 THE FRIEND OF THE LIONS.
 THE MANCHESTER STRIKE.
 THE HALL OF WINES.
 THREE WIVES.




BEEF.


If I have a mission upon this earth, (apart from the patent and notable
one of being a frightful example to the rising generation of blighted
existence and misused energies)--that mission is, I believe, beef.
I am a Cœlebs, not in search of a wife, as in Mrs. Hannah More’s
white-neck-clothed novel, but in search of beef. I have travelled far
and wide to find it--good, tender, nourishing, juicy, succulent; and
when I die, I hope that it will be inscribed on my tombstone: “Here
lies one who sought for beef. Tread lightly on his grave: quia multum
amavit.”

Next to the Habeas Corpus and the Freedom of the Press, there are
few things that the English people have a greater respect for and a
livelier faith in than beef. They bear, year after year, with the same
interminable unvarying series of woodcuts of fat oxen in the columns
of the illustrated newspapers; they are never tired of crowding to
the Smithfield Club cattle-show; and I am inclined to think that it
is their honest reverence for beef that has induced them to support
so long the obstruction and endangerment of the thoroughfares of the
metropolis, by oxen driven to slaughter. Beef is a great connecting
link and bond of better feeling between the great classes of the
commonwealth. Do not dukes hob and nob with top-booted farmers over
the respective merits of short-horns and Alderneys? Does not the noble
Marquis of Argentfork give an ox to be roasted whole on the village
green when his son, the noble Viscount Silvercorrel, comes of age? Beef
makes boys. Beef nerves our navvies. The bowmen who won Cressy and
Agincourt were beef-fed, and had there been more and better beef in
the Crimea a year ago, our soldiers would have borne up better under
the horrors of a Chersonesean winter. We feast on beef at the great
Christian festival. A baron of beef at the same time is enthroned
in St. George’s Hall, in Windsor’s ancient castle, and is borne in
by lacqueys in scarlet and gold. Charles the Second knighted a loin
of beef; and I have a shrewd suspicion that the famous Sir Bevis of
Southampton was but an ardent admirer, and doughty knight-errant in
the cause of beef. And who does not know the tradition that even as
the first words of the new-born Gargantua were “A boyre, à boyre,”
signifying that he desired a draught of Burgundy wine--so the first
intelligible sounds that the infant Guy of Warwick ever spake were,
“Beef, beef!”

When the weary pilgrim reaches the beloved shores of England after a
long absence, what first does he remark--after the incivility of the
custom-house officers--but the great tankard of stout and the noble
round of cold beef in the coffee-room of the hotel? He does not cry “Io
Bacche! Evöe Bacche!” because beef is not Bacchus. He does not fall
down and kiss his native soil, because the hotel carpet is somewhat
dusty, and the action would be, besides, egregious; but he looks at the
beef, and his eyes filling with tears, a corresponding humidity takes
place in his mouth; he kisses the beef; he is so fond of it that he
could eat it all up; and he does ordinarily devour so much of it to his
breakfast, that the thoughtful waiter gazes at him, and murmurs to his
napkin, “This man is either a cannibal or a pilgrim grey who has not
seen Albion for many years.”

By beef I mean, emphatically, the legitimate, unsophisticated article.
Give me my beef, hot or cold, roast, boiled, or broiled; but away with
your beef-kickshaws, your beef-stews, your beef-haricoes, your corned
beef, your hung beef, and your spiced beef! I don’t think there is
anything so contemptible, fraudulent, adulterine in the whole world (of
cookery) as a beef sausage. I have heard that it is a favourite dish
with pickpockets at their raffle-suppers. I believe it. There was a boy
at school with me in the byegone--a day-boy--who used to bring a clammy
brownish powder, in a sandwich-box, with him for lunch. He called
it powdered beef; and he ate this mahogany, sawdust-looking mixture
between slices of stale bread and butter. He was an ill-conditioned
boy who had begun the world in the face-grinding sense much too early.
He lent halfpence at usury, and dealt in sock (which was our slang for
surreptitious sweet-stuff); and I remember with what savage pleasure
I fell upon and beat him in the course of a commercial transaction
involving a four-bladed penknife he had sold me, and which wouldn’t
cut--no, not even slate-pencil. But the penknife was nothing more than
a pretext: I beat him for his beef. He had the ring-worm, and it was
bruited about afterwards that he was of Jewish parentage. I believe,
when he began life, he turned out but badly.

I am reminded, however, that the subject of beef, as a British
institution, has already been treated at some length in this
journal.[A] I have merely ventured a few remarks on the bovine topic
generally, to preface the experiences I have to record of some recent
travels in search of beef I have made in the capital of France. One
might employ oneself better, perhaps, than in transcribing the results
of a week’s hankering after the flesh-pots of Egypt; and surely the
journey in search of bread is long and wearisome enough that we might
take beef as it comes, and thankfully. But, as I have said, beef is my
mission. I am a collector of bovine experiences, as some men collect
editions of Virgil, and some Raffaelle’s virgins, and some broadsides,
and some butterflies. And I know that there are moralities to be found
in beef as well as in the starry heavens and the vestiges of creation.

[A] See Volume x. page 113.

Let me first sum up all the knowledge I have acquired on the subject,
by stating my firm conviction that there is no beef in Paris,--I mean,
no beef fit to be eaten by a philobosopher. Some say that the French
cut their meat the wrong way; that they don’t hang it properly; that
they don’t hang it enough; that they beat it; that they overcook it.
But I have tasted infinite varieties of French beef; of the first,
second, and third categories. I have had it burnt to a cinder, and
I have had it very nearly raw. I have eaten it in private English
families resident in Paris, and dressed by English cooks. It is a
delusion: there is no beef in Lutetia.

The first beef I tried in my last campaign was the evening I dined
at His Lorship’s. Don’t be alarmed, my democratic friend. I am not
upon Lord Cowley’s visiting list, nor are any coronetted cards ever
left at my door on the sixth storey. I did not receive a card from
the British Embassy on the occasion of the last ball at the Hôtel de
Ville; and I am ashamed to confess that, so anxious was I to partake
of the hospitality of the Prefect of the Seine (the toilettes and
the iced punch are perfect at his balls), that I was mean enough to
foreswear temporarily my nationality and to avail myself of the card
of Colonel Waterton Privilege of Harshellopolis, Mass.:--said colonel
being at that time, and in all probability exceedingly sick, in his
stateroom of the United States steamer Forked Lightning, in the middle
of the Atlantic ocean. But, by His Lorship’s I mean an Anglo-French
restaurant--named after a defunct English city eating-house--situate
near the Place de la Concorde, and where I heard that real English
roast beef was to be obtained at all hours in first-rate condition.

Now, there is one thing that I do not like abroad; yea, two that are
utterly distasteful to me. The one thing is my countrymen’s hotels and
restaurants. These houses of refection I have usually found exceedingly
uncomfortable. So I was disposed to look somewhat coldly upon His
Lordship’s invitation, as printed upon placards, and stencilled on the
walls, till I was assured that his beef was really genuine, and that he
was an Englishman without guile.

His Lordship’s mansion I found unpretending, even to obscurity. There
was no porte-cochère, no courtyard, no gilt railings, nor green
verandahs. His Lordship’s hotel was, in fact, only a little slice of
a shop, with one dining-room over it; for which I was told he paid an
enormous rent--some thousands of francs a-year. In his window were
displayed certain English viands pleasant to the sight: a mighty
beef-steak pie just cut; the kidney end of a loin of veal, with real
English stuffing, palpable to sight; some sausages that might have
been pork, and of Epping; some potatoes in their homely brown jackets,
just out at elbows, as your well-done potatoes should be, with their
flannel under-garments peeping through; and a spherical mass, something
of the size and shape of a bombshell, dark in colour, speckled black
and white, and that my beating heart told me was a plum-pudding. A
prodigious Cheshire cheese, rugged as Helvellyn, craggy as Criffell,
filled up the background like a range of yellow mountains. At the base
there were dark forests of bottles branded with the names of Allsopp,
and Bass, and Guinness, and there were cheering announcements framed
and glazed, respecting Pale Ale on draught, L.L. whisky, and Genuine
Old Tom.[B] I rubbed my hands in glee. “Ha! ha!” I said internally.
“Nothing like our British aristocracy, after all. The true stock, sir!
May His Lordship’s shadow never diminish.”

[B] Our gallant allies have yet much to learn about our English
manners and customs. Only the other night, in the Foyer of the Grand
Opera, I saw (and you may see it there still if you are incredulous) a
tastefully enamelled placard, announcing that “genuine Old Tom” was to
be had at the Buffet. Imagine Sir Harcourt Courtley asking the Countess
of Swansdown, in the crush-room of Covent Garden Theatre, if she would
take half a quartern of gin!

His Lordship’s down-stairs’ apartment was somewhat inconveniently
crowded with English grooms and French palefreniers, and with an
incorrigible old Frenchman, with a pipe as strong as Samson, a
cap, cotton in his ears, and rings in the lobes thereof, who had
learnt nothing of English but the oaths, and was cursing some very
suspicious-looking meat (not my beef, I hope) most energetically.
I have an opinion that stables and the perfume thereof are pretty
nearly analogous the whole world over; so, at the invitation of a
parboiled-looking man in a shooting-jacket and a passion (who might
have been His Lordship himself for aught I knew), I went up-stairs.
There was an outer chamber, with benches covered with red cotton
velvet, and cracked marble tables, like an indifferent café; where some
bearded men were making a horrible rattle with their dominoes, and
smoking their abominable cigars (surely a course of French cigars is
enough to cure the most inveterate smoker of his love for the weed).
This somewhat discomposed me; but I was fain to push forward into the
next saloon where the tables were laid out for dining; and taking my
seat, to wait for beef.

There was myself and a black man, and his (white) wife, the Frenchman
with the spectacles, and the Frenchman with the bald head (I speak
of them generically, for you are sure to meet their fellows at every
public dining-table abroad), the poor old Frenchman with the wig, the
paralytic head and the shaking hands that trifle with the knives and
forks, as though they were red-hot. There were half-a-dozen other sons
of Gaul; who, with their beards, cache-nezs, and paletôts, all made to
pattern, might have been one another’s brothers; two ancient maiden
ladies, who looked like English governesses, who had passed, probably,
some five-and-thirty years in Paris, and had begun to speak a little
of the language; a rude young Englishman, who took care to make all
the company aware of the coarseness of his birthplace; an English
working engineer, long resident abroad, much travel-worn, and decidedly
oily, who had a voice like a crank, and might have been the identical
engineer that Mr. Albert Smith met on the Austrian Lloyd’s steamer; and
a large-headed little boy, with a round English jacket, who sat alone,
eating mournfully, and whom I could not help fancying to be some little
friendless scholar in a great French school, whose jour de sortie it
was, and who had come here to play at an English dinner. The days be
short to thee, little boy with the large head! May they fly quickly
till the welcome holidays, when thou wilt be forwarded, per rail and
boat, to the London Bridge station of the South Eastern Railway, to be
left till called for. I know from sad experience how very weary are the
strange land and the strange bed, the strange lessons and the strange
playmates, to thy small English heart!

A gaunt, ossified waiter, with blue black hair, jaws so closely shaven
that they gave him an unpleasant resemblance to the grand inquisitor of
the holy office in disguise seeking for heretics in a cook-shop, and
who was, besides, in a perpetual cold perspiration of anger against the
irate man in the shooting jacket below, and carried on fierce verbal
warfare with him down the staircase. This waiter rose up against me,
rather than addressed me, and charged me with a pike of bread, cutting
my ordinarily immense slice from it. I mildly suggested roast beef,
wincing, it must be owned, under the eye of the cadaverous waiter; who
looked as if he were accustomed to duplicity, and did not believe a
word that I was saying.

“Ah! rosbif!” he echoed, “bien saignant n’est ce pas?”

Now, so far from liking my meat “bien saignant” I cannot even abide the
sight of it rare, and I told him so. But he repeated “bien saignant,”
and vanished.

He came again, though; or rather his Jesuitical head protruded
itself over the top of the box where I sat (there were boxes at His
Lordship’s) and asked:

“Paint portare? p’lale? ole’ ale?”

I was nettled, and told him sharply that I would try the wine, if he
could recommend it. Whereupon there was silence, and then I heard a
voice crying down a pipe, “Paint portare!”

He brought me my dinner, and I didn’t like it. It was bien saignant,
but it wasn’t beef, and it swam in a dead sea of gravy that was not to
my taste; fat from strange animals seemed to have been grafted on to
the lean. I did not get on better with the potatoes, which were full
of promise, like a park hack, and unsatisfactory in the performance. I
tried some plum-pudding afterwards; but, if the proof of the pudding
be in the eating, that pudding remains unproved to this day; for, when
I tried to fix my fork in it, it rebounded away across the room, and
hit the black man on the leg. I would rather not say anything about
the porter, if you please; and perhaps it is well to be brief on the
subject of the glass of hot gin-and-water I tried afterwards, in a
despairing attempt to be convivial; for it smelt of the midnight-lamp
like an erudite book, and of the midnight oilcan, and had the flavour
of the commercial terebinthium, rather than of the odoriferous
Juniperus. I consoled myself with some Cheshire cheese, and asked the
waiter if he had the Presse.

“Ze Time is gage,” he answered.

I did not want the Times. I wanted the Presse.

“Sare,” he repeated wrathfully, “Ze Time is gage. Le Journal Anglais
(he accentuated this spitefully) is gage.”

He would have no further commerce with me after this; and, doubtlessly
thinking that an Englishman who couldn’t eat his beef under-done or
indeed at all, and preferred the Presse to the Times newspaper, was an
outcast and a renegade, abandoned me to my evil devices, and contented
himself with crying “Voila!” from the murky distance without coming
when I called. He even declined to attend to receive payment, and
handed me over for that purpose to a long French boy in a blouse, whose
feet had evidently not long been emancipated from the pastoral sabots,
whose hair was cropped close to his head (in the manner suggesting
county gaol at home, and ignorance of small toothcombs abroad), and who
had quite a flux of French words, and tried to persuade me to eat civet
de lièvre that was to be served up at half-past seven of the clock.

But I would have borne half a hundred disappointments similar to
this dinner for the sake of the black man. Legs and feet! he was a
character! He sat opposite to me, calm, contented, magnificent, proud.
He was as black as my boot, and as shiny. His woolly head, crisped
by our bounteous mother Nature, had unmistakeably received a recent
touch of the barber’s tongs. He was perfumed; he was oiled; he had
moustaches (as I live!) twisted out into long rats’-tails by means of
pommade Hongroise. He had a tip. He had a scarlet Turkish cap with a
long blue tassel. He had military stripes down his pantaloons. He had
patent leather boots. He had shirt-studs of large circumference, pins,
gold waistcoat-buttons, and a gorgeous watch-chain. I believe he had a
crimson under-waistcoat. He had the whitest of cambric handkerchiefs, a
ring on his forefinger, and a stick with an overpowering gold knob. He
was the wonderfullest nigger that the eye ever beheld.

He had a pretty little English wife--it is a fact, madam--with long
auburn ringlets, who it was plain to see was desperately in love
with, and desperately afraid of, him. It was marvellous to behold the
rapt, fond gaze with which she contemplated him as he leaned back in
his chair after dinner, and refreshed his glistening ivories with a
toothpick. Equally marvellous was the condescension with which he
permitted her to eat her dinner in his august presence, and suffered
her to tie round his neck a great emblazoned shawl like a flag.

Who could he have been? The father of the African twins; the Black
Malibran’s brother; Baron Pompey; Prince Mousalakatzic of the Orange
River; Prince Bobo; some other sable dignitary of the empire of Hayti;
or the renowned Soulouque himself, incognito? Yet, though affable
to his spouse, he was a fierce man to the waiter. The old blood
of Ashantee, the ancient lineage of Dahomey, could ill brook the
shortcomings of that cadaverous servitor. There was an item in the
reckoning that displeased him.

“Wass this sa?” he cried, in a terrible voice; “wass this, sa? Fesh
your mas’r, sa!”

The waiter cringed and fled, and I laughed.

“Good luck have thou with thine honour: ride on ----” honest black man;
but oh, human nature, human nature! I would not be your nigger for many
dollars. More rib-roasting should I receive, I am afraid, than ever
Uncle Tom suffered from fierce Legree.

I have not dined at His Lordship’s since--I would dine there any day
to be sure of the company of the black man--but I have more to say
about Beef.




ADVENTURES OF A RUSSIAN SOLDIER.


I was inscribed as a sergeant of the Séménofski guards at a very early
age. I was entrusted to the care of one of my father’s serfs, named
Savéliitch. He taught me to read and write, and was very indignant
when he learned that a Frenchman was to be conveyed back to the estate
with the annual provision of wine and oil from Moscow. “Nobody can say
that the child has not been well fed, well combed, and well washed,”
murmured old Savéliitch; “why then spend money on a Frenchman, while
there are plenty of native servants in the house!”

M. Beaupré came and engaged himself to teach me French, German, and
all the sciences; but he made me teach him my native language, and
taught me many things that did me little good. He was fond of brandy,
and was, as I was told, too ardent an admirer of ladies. I remember
only that one day, when my respected tutor was lying upon his bed in a
hopeless state of drunkenness, and I was cutting up a map of Moscow for
a kite, my father entered the room, boxed my ears, and turned moussié
out of the house, to the great joy of Savéliitch, and to my sorrow. My
education being thus brought to a sudden close, I amused myself until I
had completed my sixteenth year, in playing at leap-frog, and watching
my mother make her exquisite preparations of honey, when one day my
father said to my mother:

“Avdotia Vassiliéva, what age is Pétroucha?”

“He has just entered his seventeenth year. Pétroucha was born the same
year that Nastasia Garasimova lost her eye, and--”

“Well, well,” my father replied, “he starts for his regiment to-morrow.”

My mother burst into tears, and I jumped for joy.

“Don’t forget, André Pétrovitch,” said my mother to my father, who was
writing my letter of introduction, “to remember me to Prince B----, and
to bid him show every kindness to Pétroucha.”

“Pétroucha is not going to St. Petersburg,” my father replied. I was
heart-broken. I had dreamed of nothing but St. Petersburg. When my
father had finished the letter, he turned to me and said:

“This letter is addressed to André Karlovitch, my old companion in
arms. He is at Orenberg, and you will join him there.” The kibitka was
at the door. The servants had stowed away in it a tea-service, and
pies of different sorts tied up in cloths. My parents gave me their
blessing. My father said to me, “Good bye, Pierre; serve your Empress
with fidelity; obey your superiors, don’t seek favours from them; and
remember the proverb, ‘Take care of your coat while it is new, and
of your honour while it is white.’” A hare-skin touloup, or cape, was
thrown about me, and over it a fox-skin cloak. Thus equipped, I took my
seat in the kibitka, and left my parents, accompanied by Savéliitch.

We arrived that night at Simbirsk, where I committed my first folly
by losing one hundred roubles at billiards, while Savéliitch was out,
executing some orders from home with which he had been entrusted. I
lost this sum to Ivan Lowrine, a captain of hussars. On this occasion
I also became intoxicated for the first time. Savéliitch hastened my
departure the following morning, and reluctantly paid my losses. I
promised him that, henceforth, I would not spend a single kopek without
his consent.

We travelled rapidly; and, as we approached our destination, the
country became a measureless waste, covered with snow. Presently, the
coachman, taking off his hat, asked me anxiously whether we should not
return; and, pointing to a white cloud far in the east, said, “That is
the bourane!”

I had heard of the bourane, and I knew that it sometimes buried whole
caravans of travellers. I knew it to be a tremendous cloud of snow, out
of which few people, once fairly in it, ever made their way. But this
one seemed to me to be a long way off, so I told the coachman to drive
forward. We went at full gallop. The wind rose rapidly, however; the
little white cloud became a huge moving snow mountain; very fine flakes
began to fall about us; then the wind howled, and in a few minutes we
could not see an inch beyond our noses. It was, in truth, the bourane.
The horses stopped; the snow began to bury us; Savéliitch began to
scold; the coachman played nervously with the horses’ harness--and no
house could be seen. We had begun to believe we should be soon buried
alive, when we suddenly perceived a black object near us, which we were
afraid was a wolf, but which turned out to be a man. We asked our way;
he replied that he knew the country under ordinary circumstances, but
could not distinguish anything then. Suddenly he cried, “Turn to the
left--there you will find a house: I smell the smoke.”

The coachman managed to whip the horses into unusual exertion, and we
presently reached a hut lighted by a loutchina (a deal stick which
serves for a candle). The ornaments of the little room into which we
were ushered were a carbine and a Cossack hat. The Cossack host got us
some tea; and then I inquired for a guide. Some one called out from a
recess that he was cold, for he had pawned his touloup the day before,
for brandy. I offered him a cup of tea, and he advanced to drink it. He
was a remarkable fellow in appearance: tall, with very broad shoulders.
He wore a black beard, and short hair; his eyes were restless and
large; the expression of his face was, at times agreeable, at times
malicious. He preferred brandy to tea; and, having held a mysterious
conversation with the host, he retired for the night. I did not like
the look of affairs; the hut was in the middle of the steppe--very
lonely, and very like the meeting-place for thieves.

But we were not robbed; and, the following morning, as we left to
proceed on our journey, I gave my hare-skin touloup, much against my
servant’s wish, to the guide who had led us to the house. The guide
was grateful, and promised that if ever he could be of service to
me I should be served. At that time the promise seemed sufficiently
ridiculous.

We arrived without further adventure at Orenberg, where I presented
my letter to the general, who received me kindly, and then sent
me to serve, under the orders of Captain Mirinoff, in the fort of
Bélogorsk. This did not please me. The fort was a wretched little
village, surrounded by palisades. I stopped before a little wooden
house, which, I was informed, was the commandant’s. I entered. In
the antechamber I found an old man, seated upon a table, occupied in
sewing a blue patch upon one of the elbows of a green uniform. He
beckoned me into the inner chamber. It was a clean little room, with
an officer’s commission, neatly framed, hanging against the wall, and
rude prints surrounding it. In one corner of the room an old lady, with
a handkerchief bound round her head, was unwinding some thread from
the hands of a little old man with only one eye, who wore an officer’s
uniform. The old lady, on seeing me, said:

“Ivan Kourmitch is not at home; but I am his wife. Be good enough to
love us, and take a seat, my little father.”

I obeyed, and the old lady sent for her subaltern, the ouriadnik. While
the servant was gone, the lady and the officer both questioned me, and
judged that it was for some offence that I was sent to Bélogorsk. The
lady informed me that Chvabrine, an officer at Bélogorsk, had been sent
thither for duelling. The ouriadnik appeared, and was a fine specimen
of a Cossack officer.

“Quarter Piote Andréïtch,” said the old lady, “upon Siméon Kouroff. The
fellow let his horse break into my garden.”

These, my quarters, looked out upon the dreary steppe. The next
morning a little fellow, with a remarkably vivacious appearance,
came to see me. I found that he was Chvabrine, the duellist. His
lively conversation amused me, and we went together that day to the
commandant’s house to dinner. As we approached it I saw about twenty
little old invalids, wearing long tails, and three-cornered hats,
ranged in order of battle. The commandant, a tall, hale old man,
dressed in a cotton nightcap and a morning gown, was reviewing this
terrible force. He spoke some civil words to me, and we left him to
complete his military duties. When we arrived at his house, we found
the old one-eyed man and Palachka laying the cloth. Presently, the
captain’s daughter, Marie, made her appearance. Chvabrine had described
her to me as a very foolish person. She was about sixteen years of age,
had a fine fresh colour, and was very bashful.

I did not think much of her that day. She blushed terribly when her
mother declared that all she could bring her husband in the way
of wealth was a comb and a few kopeks. We talked chiefly of the
possibility of standing a siege from the Bachkirs; and the commandant
declared that if such a siege occurred he would teach the enemy a
terrible lesson. I thought of the twenty invalids, and did not feel
quite so confident on the subject.

Ivan Kourmitch and his wife Vassilissa were very kind to me, and
received me as one of the family. I liked the little one-eyed officer;
I became more intimate with Marie.

Father Garasim and his wife Akoulina I was also glad to meet, almost
daily, at the commandant’s house. But I soon disliked Chvabrine. He
talked lightly and slightingly of Marie, and even of Vassilissa. One
day, however, I read to him some amorous verses I had written; he saw
at once, and truly, that they were addressed to Marie. He ridiculed
them mercilessly, and told me that if I wished to win the love of Marie
I had only to give her a pair of ear-rings. I flew into a passion, and
asked him how he dared to take away the character of the commandant’s
daughter. He replied, impertinently, that he spoke of her from
personal experience. I told him to his teeth that he lied. He demanded
satisfaction.

I went to the one-eyed officer--whom I found threading mushrooms for
Vassilissa--to ask him to act as second. But he declined. In the
evening I was at the commandant’s house; and thinking that night that
it might be my last, as my duel with Chvabrine was to be early on the
morrow, Marie appeared dearer to me than ever. Chvabrine came, and
behaved so insolently that I could hardly wait until the morrow.

I was to my time, the next morning, behind a haystack; Chvabrine was
also punctual. We had just stripped our coats off, when the one-eyed
officer appeared with five invalids, and marched us off in custody.

Vassilissa ordered us to give up our swords, and told Palachka to take
them up into the loft; for, in truth, Vassilissa was the commandant
of Bélogorsk. She then ordered Ivan Kourmitch to put us in opposite
corners of the rooms, and to feed us on bread and water until we
repented. Marie was very pale. After a stormy discussion, however, our
swords were restored to us, and I parted with my adversary: feigning
reconcilement, but secretly agreeing to meet again when the affair had
quite blown over. The next night I had an opportunity of talking alone
with Marie Ivanovna; and I learned from her--how she blushed as she
told me!--that Chvabrine had proposed marriage to her, but that she had
refused him. This information explained to me the fellow’s measured
scandal. I burned to meet him again.

I had not to wait long. The next day, as I was biting my pen, thinking
of a rhyme in an elegy I was composing, the very fellow tapped at my
window. I understood him; seized my sword; engaged with him; and fell
presently--wounded in the shoulder, and insensible.

When I became once more conscious, I found myself in a strange bed,
Savéliitch by my side, and--Marie Ivanovna also. She asked me tenderly
how I felt? Savéliitch, faithful fellow, cried out:

“Thanks to Heaven he recovers, after four days of it!”

But Marie interrupted him, and begged him not to disturb me with his
loud exclamations. I seized her hand, and she did not withdraw it.
Presently I felt her burning lips upon my forehead. I asked her then to
become my wife. She begged me to calm myself, if only for her sake, and
left me.

Although the barber of the regiment was my only medical adviser, I soon
recovered. I and Marie were engaged; but she doubted whether my parents
would consent. This doubt I could not help sharing; but the letter I
wrote to my father on the subject appeared to both of us so tender and
convincing, that we felt certain of its success, and gave ourselves up
to the happy dreams of lovers.

I found that Chvabrine was a prisoner in the corn-warehouse, and that
Vassilissa had his sword under lock and key. I obtained his pardon
from the captain; and, in my happiness at tracing his wretched calumny
to offended pride, forgave him. My father, in answer to my appeal,
refused my prayer, and informed me that I should soon be removed from
Bélogorsk. He also wrote to Savéliitch, and called him “an old dog,”
for not having taken better care of me.

I went straight to my mistress. She was bitterly distressed, but
adjured me to follow the will of Heaven, and submit. She would never
marry me, she declared, without the benediction of my parents, and from
that day she avoided me.

This was towards the end of the year seventeen hundred and
seventy-three. The inhabitants of the vast and fertile province of
Orenberg had only lately acknowledged the sovereignty of the Czar, and
were yet discontented, and full of revolutionary ideas. Every month
some little insurrection bubbled up. To suppress this harassing state
of things, the imperial government had erected fortresses in various
parts of the province, and quartered therein Cossack soldiers. These
Cossacks in their turn became turbulent; and the severe measures
adopted by General Traubenberg to reduce the army to obedience ended
in his cruel murder, and a rising that cost much blood. By severe
imperial punishments this rising had been suppressed; and it was only
some time after my arrival at Bélogorsk that the authorities perceived
how ineffectual their cruel punishments had been.

One evening when I was sitting alone in my room, thinking of doleful
things, I was sent for by the commandant. I found him in consultation
with Chvabrine, Ivan Ignatiitch, and the ouriadnik of the Cossacks.
Neither Marie nor her mother appeared. The subject of our conference
was the rising of the Cossacks under Pougatcheff, and his assumption
of the style and title of Peter the Third. The commandant had received
orders to be on his guard; and, if possible, to exterminate the enemy.
Putting on his spectacles, he began to bustle about, and to issue
orders to have the cannon cleaned; and to have the Cossacks kept true
to the imperial cause.

The ouriadnik had already deserted to the rebel’s camp. A Bachkir
had been taken prisoner, with seditious papers upon his person. This
prisoner, had been bound and secured in the commandant’s loft; and it
was resolved that he should be conducted before us, and be subjected to
the torture, in order to extract from him a description of his leader’s
strength.

The commandant had scarcely ordered the Bachkir into his presence,
when Vassilissa rushed into the chamber, and cried out that the rebels
had taken the fortress of Nijnéosern, had hanged all the officers, and
were now marching upon Bélogorsk. I thought of Marie, and trembled;
but my energy increased with the occasion, and I at once advised
the commandant to send the ladies to Orenberg. But Vassilissa would
not hear of this. She declared that she would live and die with
her husband, but that she thought Marie should be sent away; and
that evening--the last Marie might possibly spend at Bélogorsk--the
supper-table was surrounded by gloomy faces; and no face I think, was
gloomier than mine. We parted early, but I contrived to forget my
sword, that I might have an excuse for returning to bid Marie good-bye
alone. When I returned, I clasped her in my arms; she sobbed bitterly;
and thus we parted. I went home, and, without undressing myself, lay
down to sleep.

I was aroused by the entrance of the corporal, who came to announce
to me that the Cossack soldiers had all deserted the fortress, and
that bands of strange men surrounded us. I thought, with horror, that
Marie’s retreat was cut off. Having given some necessary orders to the
bearer of this unwelcome news, I hurried off to the commandant’s house,
as the day was dawning. On the way I was met by Ivan Ignatiitch, who
told me that the commandant was already upon the ramparts, and that
it was too late for the commandant’s daughter to be safely conveyed
to Orenberg. Terribly agitated, I followed the one-eyed officer to
that little eminence protected by a pallisade, which was the only
fortification of Bélogorsk. The captain was arranging his soldiers
in order of battle. In the dreary distance of the steppe, I could
plainly see the Cossacks and the Bachkirs. The commandant ordered Ivan
Ignatiitch to point the cannon upon the enemy, and the soldiers all
vowed that they would fight to the death.

Presently, as the enemy began to advance in a compact mass, Vassilissa,
accompanied by Marie, who would not leave her mother, appeared, to know
how affairs stood. Marie’s pale face was turned upon me, and I burned
to prove to her that I had a brave spirit worthy of her love. In the
midst of the advancing enemy, Pougatcheff, the renowned rebel leader,
could be distinguished, mounted upon a white horse. In a few minutes
four horsemen advanced from the main body, and rode close up to the
ramparts. They were four traitors from the fortress. They called upon
us not to resist. The captain replied by a volley which killed one
of the four, and the rest rode back to join the advancing army. The
balls now began to whistle about us; and at this moment the commandant
ordered Vassilissa and Marie to withdraw. The old man blessed his
child, embraced his wife, and bade her put a sarafan upon Marie, lest
she should require it; the sarafan being the rich robe in which the
dead are buried. The pale girl came back to make to me the sign of a
last farewell, and then went away with her mother.

The fall of the fortress was soon accomplished. Our soldiers would not
fight (though they had very much affected me when they swore to do
it), but threw down their arms after the first assault. We were taken
prisoners, and dragged by the triumphant rebels through the streets, to
an open place, where Pougatcheff was seated surrounded by his officers.
He was handsomely dressed; and, as I caught a glimpse of his face
through the crowd, I thought it was one I had seen before. Pougatcheff
ordered the commandant to swear fidelity to him as his lawful czar.
Ivan Kourmitch replied with a defiance. Pougatcheff fluttered a white
handkerchief in the air, and in a few moments our poor commandant was
swinging from a gibbet. Ivan Ignatiitch shared his commander’s fate:
and then my turn came. I was ready to follow my brave brother officers;
when Chvabrine, who had found time to cut his hair short and provide
himself with a Cossack caftan, to desert to the enemy, whispered
something in the chief’s ear. Pougatcheff, without looking at me, said,
“Hang him at once!”

The rope was round my neck, and my thoughts were with Heaven, when I
was suddenly released. I found that Savéliitch had thrown himself at
the chief’s feet, and told him that a large sum would be paid for my
ransom. I was put aside, and remained a horrified spectator of the
scenes which ensued. A Cossack killed Vassilissa with his sword, at
the foot of her husband’s gibbet, and then Pougatcheff went to Father
Garasim’s to dinner. I rushed to the commandant’s house to find Marie;
there every room had been ransacked. Presently, however, I found
Palachka, and she told me that the commandant’s daughter was at Father
Garasim’s house. Wild with terror I rushed thither, for it was to be
the scene of Cossack revels. I asked for the father’s wife; and she
told me that she had passed Marie off as her niece. The poor girl was
safe. I returned home hastily, passing groups of rebels engaged in the
work of pillage.

Savéliitch asked me whether I did not remember Pougatcheff. I did not.
He was surprised; and reminded me of the drunken fellow to whom I had
given my touloup on my way to Orenberg. He was right; that drunken
wanderer was now the successful rebel-chief, and I understood the mercy
that had been extended to me. But I was much troubled. I could not
make up my mind to leave Marie; yet I knew that my duty to my country
forbade me to remain in the midst of a rebel camp. While I was thinking
deeply of these opposite calls upon my conduct, a Cossack arrived
to take me once more before his chief, at the commandant’s house,
where I found Pougatcheff seated at a table covered with bottles, and
surrounded by eight or ten Cossack officers. The wine had already
excited them. Chvabrine and the rebel ouriadnik, who had deserted with
the Cossacks from the fort, were of the party.

Pougatcheff welcomed me heartily, and bade his officers make place
for me at the banqueting table. I sat down in silence. Here, on the
previous night, I had taken leave of Marie.

All were on good terms and quite free with their chief. A march upon
Orenberg having been arranged, the officers retired. I was about to
follow them, when Pougatcheff bade me remain. When we were alone, he
burst into a fit of laughter; telling me he had spared me because of my
kindness to him when he was hiding from his enemies, and that now, if I
would serve him, he would heap favours upon me. He asked me to tell him
frankly whether or not I believed him to be the Czar. I was firm, and
told him that he was too clever to believe me, even if I were capable
of telling him a lie to serve my purpose. He promised to make me
field-marshal if I would remain with him. I replied that I had sworn to
serve the Empress; and that, if he wished to do me a favour, he would
provide me with an escort to Orenberg. I told him that my life was in
his hands, but that I would neither serve him nor promise not to bear
arms against him. He behaved well, and said I should be free.

Next morning I found Pougatcheff surrounded by his officers, throwing
money to the crowd. He beckoned me to approach, told me to leave
instantly for Orenberg, and to tell the garrison to expect him in a
week. If they threw open the gates to him they would be well treated:
if they resisted they must expect terrible consequences. He then turned
to the crowd, and, to my horror, presented Chvabrine to them as their
future governor! Chvabrine! Marie’s traducer!

When Pougatcheff had left the square, I hastened to Father Garasim’s
house to learn that Marie was in a fever and quite delirious. I rushed
to her room--how changed she was! She did not know me. How could I
leave the poor orphan at Bélogorsk while Chvabrine remained governor?
Suddenly, however, I thought that I might make all haste to Orenberg
and return with a strong force, drive the rebels away, and claim my
bride. I seized the poor girl’s burning hand, kissed it, took leave of
her good protectors, and was soon on my way, determined not to lose a
moment.

As we approached Orenberg we saw the state prisoners with their shaven
heads and disfigured faces, hard at work upon the fortifications. I was
conducted direct to the general, who was lopping the fruit trees in the
garden. I related to him the misfortunes of Bélogorsk, and pressed for
help. He replied that there would be a council of war in the evening,
and that he would be happy to see me at it. I was there punctually.
A cup of tea was given to each guest, after which the general called
upon all present to deliberate upon the state of affairs. The question
was, should the Imperial troops act on the offensive or defensive?
He declared that he should require an opinion from each individual;
and, as usual, he should begin by asking the opinion of the junior
officers. He then turned to me. I stated that the rebels were not in
a condition to resist a disciplined army, and therefore urged the
propriety of acting vigorously on the offensive: hereupon a little
civil functionary, who was taking his third cup of tea with the help of
an admixture of rum, suggested that operations should be confined to an
offer of seventy or one hundred roubles for the head of Pougatcheff.
Every voice was for defensive measures; and, when all present had
delivered their opinions, the general, tapping the ashes out of his
pipe, declared that he was of the same opinion as the ensign. I looked
proudly about me; but the conclusion of the general’s speech turned
the triumph to the side of my opponents, for this gallant old soldier
declared that he could not assume the responsibility of acting against
the decision of the majority; therefore, preparations must be made for
a siege, and we must depend upon the fire of the artillery, and the
force of vigorous sorties. I returned to my quarters in a state of
wretched despondency. Poor Marie!

Pougatcheff was true to his message. He appeared before Orenberg
with a considerable force, and the siege lasted long--with various
fortune--until the people within the walls were almost starving. One
day when some of our cavalry had dispersed a strong body of Cossacks,
I was about to dispatch a loiterer with my Turkish sword, when he
raised his hat and saluted me by name. I recognised the ouriadnik of
Bélogorsk. He had a letter for me--I tore it open--it was from Marie.
It informed me that she was the forced occupant of Chvabrine’s house,
and that within three days she would be compelled to marry him or be at
his mercy. The girl implored me to fly to her succour.

Almost mad, I spurred my horse, rode at full gallop to the general’s
house, threw myself without ceremony into his room, and asked him to
give me a battalion of soldiers and fifty Cossacks to drive the rebels
out of Bélogorsk. The old soldier began to argue the matter coolly.
This exasperated me, and I told him that the daughter of our late
valiant commander was in the hands of Chvabrine, and that he was about
to force her to marry him. The general thought that she might be very
happy with him for a time, and that afterwards, when he had shot him on
the ramparts of Orenberg, it would be time enough for me to marry the
charming widow. There was no hope of softening the old man. I wandered
away in despair. Out of this despair, grew a desperate resolution.

I resolved to leave Orenberg and go alone to Bélogorsk. Savéliitch
tried in vain to dissuade me from my purpose, but without effect. I
mounted my horse and rode briskly past the sentinels, out of Orenberg,
followed by my faithful servant: who was mounted upon a lean horse,
which one of the besieged had given him, having no more food for it. We
rode hard; but night had closed in when we approached the great ravine
where the main body of the rebels, under Pougatcheff, were encamped.
Suddenly four or five lusty fellows surrounded me. I struck at the
first with my sword--putting spurs to my horse, at the same time, and
so escaped; but Savéliitch was overpowered, and, returning to help
him, I was overpowered too, and through the darkness of that terrible
night, led before the rebel chief that his guard might know whether
they should hang me at once or wait till daylight. I was conducted at
once to the isbâ, which was called the czar’s palace. This imperial
hut was lighted by two tallow candles, and was furnished like any
common isbâ, except that the walls were finely papered. Pougatcheff,
surrounded by his officers, recognised me at once, and bade all his
attendants retire, except two, one of whom was a prisoner escaped from
Siberia. This man’s face was hideously disfigured; his nose had been
cut off, and his forehead and cheeks branded with red-hot irons. I told
my business frankly, and Pougatcheff declared that the oppressor of
the orphan should be hanged. But his officers dissuaded him, and one
of them suggested that he should try the effects of a little torture
upon me. Pougatcheff then questioned me as to the state of Orenberg;
and, although I knew that the people were dying of hunger, I declared
that it was excellently provisioned. This reply suggested to one of
the chief’s confidential friends, the propriety of having me hanged,
as an impertinent liar. But Pougatcheff was a generous enemy, and made
me declare to him that the commandant’s daughter was my betrothed, and
then he bade his officers prepare supper for us, saying that I was an
old friend of his. I would have willingly avoided the festivity, but it
was impossible; and I saw two little Cossack girls enter to spread the
cloth, sadly enough. I ate my fish soup almost in silence.

The festivity was continued until all present were more or less
intoxicated, and until Pougatcheff had fallen asleep in his seat. I
was then conducted to the place in which I was to sleep, and was there
locked up for the night. On the following morning I found a crowd
surrounding a kibitka, in which Pougatcheff was seated. He beckoned
me to a seat beside him, and to my astonishment shouted to the stout
Tartar driver, “To Bélogorsk!” The kibitka slipped quickly over the
snow. In a few hours I should see my beloved Marie.

We drew up, after a rapid journey, before the old commandant’s house.
Chvabrine hastened out to meet his sovereign; but was troubled when
he saw me. Pougatcheff entered the house, drank a glass of brandy,
then asked about Marie. Chvabrine said she was in bed. His chief then
ordered the traitor to conduct us to her room. The fellow did so, but
hesitated at her door,--pretended to have lost the key--then said that
the girl was delirious. Pougatcheff forced the door with his foot;
and, to my inexpressible horror I saw my dear betrothed lying upon
the floor, in coarse peasant clothing, with bread and water before
her. She shrieked when she saw me. Pougatcheff asked her what her
husband had been doing to her; but she replied vehemently that she was
not his wife, and never would be. Pougatcheff turned furiously upon
Chvabrine, and Chvabrine, to my disgust, fell upon his knees at the
rebel chief’s feet. Then Pougatcheff told Marie that she was safe; but
she recognised in him the murderer of her father and closed her eyes in
horror. However, he made Chvabrine write a safe-conduct for Marie and
me through all the provinces under the control of his followers; and
then he went out to inspect the fortifications. I was left alone, and
presently Marie came to me, with a smile upon her pale face, dressed in
her own becoming clothes.

We enjoyed the tenderness of our meeting for a time in silence; but
presently I told her my plan--how that it was impossible for her
to accompany me to Orenberg, where starvation was playing terrible
ravages;--how I had arranged that Savéliitch should conduct her to my
father’s house. Remembering my father’s letter, she hesitated; but, at
length, my arguments prevailed. In an hour my safe-conduct arrived.

We followed in a few hours, travelling in an old carriage that had
belonged to Marie’s father, Palachka being in attendance upon Marie.
A little after nightfall we arrived at a small town which we believed
to be in the possession of the rebels; but, on giving Pougatcheff’s
pass-word to the sentinels, we were instantly surrounded by Russian
soldiers, and I was hurried off to prison. I demanded an interview
with the commanding officer; but this was refused; and I was told the
major had ordered Marie to be taken to him. Blind with fury, I rushed
past the sentinels direct into the major’s room, where I found him
gambling with his officers. In a moment I recognised him,--as the
commander--Lowrine, who had lightened my purse at Simbirsk.

He received me with a hearty greeting, and began to rally me about my
travelling companion; but my explanations quieted his raillery, and he
went to make his excuses to Marie for his rude message, and to provide
her with the best lodging the town afforded. I supped with Lowrine
that night, and agreed to do my duty, by joining his troop at once,
and sending my betrothed on to Simbirsk, under the care of Savéliitch.
Savéliitch had many objections, but I overpowered them; and Marie shed
many tears, but I kissed them away before we parted.

The vigorous operations of the following spring brought many reverses
to Pougatcheff; at last he was taken. I jumped for joy. I should
clasp my beloved Marie once more in my arms. Lowrine laughed at my
extravagant delight.

I was about to depart for my father’s house when Lowrine entered my
room, and showed me an order for my arrest, and safe conveyance to
Kazan, to give evidence against Pougatcheff. This drove me nearly mad
with disappointment. There was no evasion to be thought of, and I was
escorted on my way to Kazan, between two hussars with drawn swords. I
found this place almost in ashes. Here I was at once placed in irons,
and locked up in a wretched cell. But my conscience was tranquil, for
I had resolved to tell the simple truth about my transactions with
Pougatcheff.

On the day after my arrival I appeared before the council. In reply
to the questions of my judges--who were evidently prejudiced against
me--I told every fact as it had occurred, until I came to Marie, when
I suddenly thought that to name her would be to ruin her. I hesitated
and was silent. I was then confronted with another prisoner--Chvabrine!
He lied my life away; swore that I had been a spy in the service of
Pougatcheff, and we were both conducted back to prison.

Meantime, my father had received Marie kindly, and both my parents
soon loved her. She explained to them the innocence of my connexion
with the rebel chief, and they laughed at my adventures; until one day
they received a letter from their relation, Prince Banojik, telling
them that I had been convicted; but that, through his interference, my
punishment was commuted to perpetual exile in Siberia.

My parents were stricken with grief, and Marie, with the soul of a
heroine, started with Palachka and the faithful Savéliitch for St.
Petersburg. She heard that the Court was at the summer palace of
Tzarskoïé-Selo; and, with the assistance of the wife of a tradesman
who served the Empress, gained access to the Palace gardens. Here she
met a very agreeable lady, to whom she told her story, mentioning how
I suffered because I would not even divulge her own name to exculpate
myself. This lady listened attentively, and then promised to take care
that the petition on my behalf should be presented to the Empress. A
few hours afterwards, Marie was summoned before the Empress herself, in
whom she recognised the lady she had met in the garden, and I received
my pardon; the Empress being convinced that I was innocent.

Shortly afterwards, we were married.[C]

[C] This story forms the substance of the most popular prose fiction
of the Russian poet Pouschkin, who died in eighteen hundred and
thirty-nine. He was historiographer to the Emperor Nicholas.




P.N.C.C.


The thing which drove me from my late purchase of Longfield Hall in
Cumberland--after nine months’ trial,--back to town, has been a dead
secret, until this present writing. My friends have found a mine of
reasons to explain the circumstance: either the county families refused
to visit us; or our income was not more than enough to maintain our
lodge-keeper; or my eldest daughter had made love to the surgeon’s
young man at Nettleton; or I could not get on without my billiards and
my five to two at whist; or I had been horse-whipped by Lord Wapshaw
for riding over his hounds. There was more behind the curtain than
people thought; and a thousand other good-natured explanations.

The actual facts are these: We arrived in Cumberland at the close
of last autumn, and were as happy for some months as the days were
long--and the days were very long indeed; everybody was kind and
hospitable to us, and, on our parts, my port became a proverb and my
daughters a toast. It was “Blathers, come and take pot-luck,” from
almost any neighbour I fell in with on my walks; or, “Mr. Blathers,
we see nothing of your good wife and family,” from the archdeacon’s
lady, though we had been dining at the Cloisters three times within
the fortnight; or “Lord and Lady Wapshaw have the----” but, no; the
forms of familiarity, through which the high nobility communicate with
their intimates, should not be lightly quoted. In a word, then, I was a
popular man and “an accession to the county.”

In the early spring time I began to feel the country gentleman’s first
grief; it came over with the swallows and, like them, never left
my roof. Two of my acquaintances--men I had never esteemed as evil
genii--rode over on an April day to Longfield; Sir Chuffin Stumps
and Biffin Biffin of the Oaks; they were unusually cordial--quite
empressés, my wife subsequently observed--to all of us, and after
luncheon they desired to have some conversation with me in my study;
that is the apartment wherein I keep my Landed Gentry, my stomach-pump
(a capital thing to have in a country-house), and my slippers, and
thither my two guests were ushered.

“It has always been the custom, my dear Blathers,” said the baronet,
“for the tenant of Longfield Hall to be the president of the Nettleton
Cricket-club; that we should offer, that he should accept that honor,
is due to his position in the county” (and indeed there was scarcely
a flat piece of ground big enough to play upon in all the district,
except in my paddock, I well know). “Lather, your predecessor, was
president; Singin was president before him; the Longfields of Longfield
were presidents time out of mind; and you--Blathers--you will be
president now?”

“Of course you will,” agreed Biffin.

“But, my dear sirs,” said I, “what shall I have to do?--what will be my
duties, my--”

“Do!--nothing at all,” interrupted Sir Chuffin Stumps, “positively
nothing; you have no duties, only privileges; let us have your ground
to play upon; dine with us on Wednesdays in the tent, and on the great
match-days; give a crust of bread and a shakedown to a swell from
any long distance, now and then; you sit at the head of the festive
board--your health is drunk continually--you are appealed to upon
all the nice points of the game, and your decision is final. It’s a
splendid post!”

“Splendid!” echoed Biffin.

“But I have not played at cricket for this thirty years,” I urged. “I
don’t know the rules. I couldn’t see the ball, if you were to give me
all creation. I’m as blind as a bat.”

“Ha, ha, very good,” laughed the baronet. “A bat--d’ye see, Biffin,--a
bat? Blathers will do, depend upon it; he’ll keep the table in a roar.
As for the game, Mr. President, it’s just what it used to be--round
instead of under, that’s all; and they cut a good deal oftener and stop
much less, perhaps, than they used to do.”

“Dear me,” said I, “then there’s not so many of them as there were, I
suppose?”

“And as for near-sight,” pursued Sir Chuffin, “play in spectacles.
Bumpshus, our great wicket-keeper, he plays in spectacles; Grogram,
your vice-president, he plays in spectacles; it’s considered rather an
advantage than otherwise to play in spectacles.”

“Certainly,” echoed Biffin, “it’s a great advantage.”

“So good-bye, Blathers,” said both gentlemen rising; “the first of May
is our meeting day, and the tent must be up and everything arranged,
of course, by that time; but Grogram will write and let you know every
particular.”

And that was how I was made P.N.C.C., almost without a struggle.

In the course of a week I received a letter from Grogram, saying that
there would be no difficulty whatever about anything; he would settle
about the dining-tent, and the dressing-tent, and the cooking-tent,
and I should only have the contracts for food and the wine-tasting
to manage; the hiring of a bowler, the cutting and rolling of the
grass. The coming matches for the year--I should, of course, arrange
about myself; and I must be sure, he wrote, to let all the members
of the club know of the day of meeting, and all the playing members
of every match-day, and to dun Lord Wapshaw for his two years’-due
subscriptions, as the treasurer didn’t like to--with some other little
matters; and, by the bye, did I happen to have my cricket toggery
complete yet? as, if not, he (Grogram) could let me have a registered
belt almost for nothing, because he had grown out of it, he was sorry
to say, himself; also some improved galvanised india-rubber leg-guards,
and some tubular batting-gloves, and a catapult--remarkably cheap.
The postscript said, “of course you will come out in flannels and
spike-soles.”

I really thought when I first read this letter that I should have
died with anxiety. I showed it to Mrs. Blathers, and she fairly burst
into tears, and it was hours before we could either of us look our
difficulties calmly in the face. Flannels! I had at that moment upon
my person the only description of flannel garment which I possessed--a
jerkin coming down no distance at all, and not to be dreamt of as a
reception-dress to the club and half the county upon the first of
May; spike-soles I did happen to have, being a skater, and set them
out accordingly; but what possible use a pair of skates could be for
cricket I could not imagine. The rest of the things I sent to Grogram
for, who accommodated me with them very good-naturedly for fifteen
pounds fifteen shillings. I put them all on--one way and another--but
could make no use of the catapult, except to sit in it, and my youngest
child had convulsions, because, she sobbed, Pa looked so like that
dreadful diver who lived in the pond at the Polytechnic.

I issued all the circulars, and signed myself the obedient servant of
two hundred and forty-six strange gentlemen. I set my gardener and my
coachman to roll out the cricket-ground. I tasted the bad sherry of
the three Nettleton wine-merchants, and made two of them my enemies
for life. My advertisements for a bowler were answered by a host of
youths, with immense professions and very limited employment; some were
from Lord’s, some from the Oval, “the Maribun know’d him well enough,”
averred one young gentleman; another--with a great hollow in his hand
from constant practice--affirmed, that “if I wanted hart, there I had
it, and no mistake;” by which he meant that Art was enshrined in his
proper person--and him I chose.

The first of May was as the poets love to paint it: the white tents
glittered in sunshine, and the flags fluttered from their tops to a
gentle breeze; the wickets were pitched upon the velvet sward, a fiddle
and cornopean, concealed in the shrubbery, welcomed every arrival with
See the Conquering Hero Comes; and the president’s heart beat high
with the sense of his position. I was attired in my full diving-dress,
over the Nettleton uniform, and I held a bat in my right hand. The
sides were chosen, and the game began; the carriages of the nobility
and gentry formed a brilliant circle round the ground; a flying ball,
struck by a hand more skilful than common, gave their situation the
least touch of peril to enhance it. I myself was placed at one of the
wickets, and my new bowler was placed opposite to me; he and I had
practised together for a day or two, and he knew the balls I liked. I
sent the sixth out to the left with a great bang, to the admiration
of all but Grogram--who is a person of saturnine disposition--and got
three runs; alas! the unprofessional Wilkins--the swiftest round-hand
in the club--then inherited the mission of my destruction by bowling
to me; the whizz of his balls absolutely took away my breath, and, if
they had struck me, would doubtless have taken away my legs. But I
placed the bat resolutely in the earth, and cowered behind it as well
as I could manage. At last, after a warning cry of Play!--about as
inappropriate a name as he could have called it--a tornado seemed to
sweep past me, followed by a smack as of the resistance of flesh, and
the wicket-keeper ejaculated “Out!” to my infinite joy.

Then came the happy time of cricket. The danger of the thing being
over for that whole innings, you have nothing to do but to lie on the
ground with a cigar, and explain how you had intended to have caught
that ball, and hit it between long field off and cover point; when
you holloa out, “Butter-fingers!” and “Wide!” and “Run it out!” My
happiness, however, was but of short duration; the new bowler delivered
his deadly weapon against the rest in a manner he had known better
than to practise upon me. Wilkins, too, seemed to derive new strength
from every bail he struck towards the sky, and reaped the air with
that tremendous arm of his more terribly than ever. In an hour and
twenty minutes, we were fagging out on our side. The president had his
choice of places; and, having observed that the wicket-keepers had
either stopped the balls, or much diminished their velocity before they
arrived at long-stop, I declared for that happy post. Alas! this was
the case no longer. Swift as thought, and infinitely more substantial,
the balls rushed with unabated fury beside me; hardly, by leaping into
the air, and stretching my legs very wide apart, could I escape the
fearful concussion. “Stop ’em! Stop ’em!” screamed the fielders. “Why
the deuce don’t he stop ’em?” bawled old Grogram, indignantly. So I
waited my opportunity, watching, hat in hand, till one came slower
than usual; and then I pounced upon him from behind, as a boy does on
a butterfly. The crown of my hat was carried away, indeed, but the
missile could not force its way through my person, and I threw it up
to the man that hallo’d for it most in triumph; but my reputation as a
cricketer was gone for ever.

At dinner I was comparatively successful. Lord Wapshaw was on my right;
Sir Chuffin Stumps on my left; two long lines of gentlemen in flannels
were terminated, perspectively, by Grogram, opposite; the archdeacon
said grace; my new bowler assisted in waiting at table; and everything
was upon the most gorgeous scale. Presently, however, the rain came
down in torrents, and, in spite of the patent imperviousness of the
tent, as vouched for by the vice-president, some umbrellas had to be
borrowed from the hall (which were never returned). After dinner, there
was a friend of his lordship to be ballotted for, and I distributed
the little balls, as directed, and sent round the box. The rule of
exclusion was one black ball in ten. There were four black balls to
thirty white balls, and I had to publish the fact to all present.

“My friend black-balled, sir?” said the irascible peer. “Impossible!
Did you do it?--did you?--did you?” he asked of everybody successively,
amidst roars of laughter at his utter want of appreciation of the
fundamental end and aim of the institution of vote by ballot. “There
must be some mistake, sir,” said he, when they had each and all
declined to satisfy such an extraordinary enquiry. “Mr. Blathers, try
them again.”

This time there were four white balls to thirty black ones, a
melancholy result which I had also to announce. His lordship left the
tent--the marquee, somebody observed--like a maniac; and, though I
swear I did not blackball his man, he never asked me to Hiltham Castle
again from that day to this.

Now the season had begun, I became inundated with letters from the
presidents of other cricket-clubs, requesting the N.C.C. to play them
on some particular day; which, if it suited Wilkins, was invariably
inconvenient to Grogram, and if it pleased Grogram, was sure to be the
worst in the year for all the rest. So we were requested to name our
own day, in a flippant, skittle-playing, come-on-when-you-like sort of
manner, throwing upon me still greater responsibilities. The end of it
was that the Levant club came to Nettleton, eat our dinner, drank our
wine, and beat us; but refused to play a return match, or to give us
any dinner whatever. Swiftly Downham, Esq., the man who has a European
reputation as mid-wicket-on, honoured us by his company at Longfield
“for a couple of nights,” as he bargained, and stayed a fortnight,
smoking regularly in the best bedroom. Swiper, the professional
batsman, also favoured us, and left me a cotton pocket-handkerchief
with a full-length portrait of himself, in exchange, I hope--or else
it was robbery--for a plain white silk one of my own. A whole school
came over from Chumleyborough to play us, and nine of them took up
their quarters at the hall. Fresh from toffey and gingerbeer as they
were, I was fool enough to give them a champagne supper, of which
the consequences were positively tremendous. They were all of them
abominably ill, and the biggest boy kissed my daughter Florence,
mistaking her, as he afterwards stated in apology, for one of the maids.

Wednesday, on which the club met, became my dark day of the week, and
cast its shadow before and behind it; it was then that I made feud with
Wilkins, by deciding that his balls were wide, and exasperated Grogram
by declaring his legs were before wicket. I should not have known how
these things were, even could I have seen so far; but I gave judgment
alternately, now for the ins and now for the outs, with the utmost
impartiality. One fine afternoon my own and favourite bowler absconded
with about a dozen of the best bats, quite a forest of stumps, and a
few watches belonging to the members of the N.C.C.; this was the drop
too much that made my cup of patience overflow. I determined to resign,
and I did resign.

Staying at Longfield Hall any longer, having ceased to be the
president, I felt was not to be thought of, so I disposed of it. I
wrote a cheque for a lot of things, embraced Grogram (whom I dearly
love), and left the club my catapult. My last act of office was to
appoint another bowler--a black man. He does capitally, Wilkins
writes; only--from his having been selected by me from a band of
tumblers, I suppose--he will always bowl from under his left leg.




LAVATER’S WARNING.


    Trust him little who doth raise
      To the same height both great and small,
    And sets the sacred crown of praise,
      Smiling, on the head of all.

    Trust him less who looks around
      To censure all with scornful eyes,
    And in everything has found
      Something that he dare despise.

    But for one who stands apart,
      Stirr’d by nought that can befall,
    With a cold indifferent heart,
      Trust him least and last of all.




THE FRIEND OF THE LIONS.


We are in the Studio of a friend of ours, whose knowledge of
all kinds of Beasts and Birds has never been surpassed, and to
whose profound acquaintance with the whole Animal Kingdom, every
modern picture-gallery and every print-shop, at home and abroad,
bears witness. We have been wanted by our friend as a model for a
Rat-catcher. We feel much honored, and are sitting to him in that
distinguished capacity, with an awful Bulldog much too near us.

Our friend is, as might be expected, the particular friend of the
Lions in the Zoological Gardens, Regent’s Park, London. On behalf of
that Royal Family dear to his heart, he offers--standing painting away
at his easel, with his own wonderful vigour and ease--a few words of
friendly remonstrance to the Zoological Society.

You are an admirable society (says our friend, throwing in, now a
bit of our head, and now a bit of the Bulldog’s), and you have done
wonders. You are a society that has established in England, a national
menagerie of the most beautiful description, and that has placed it
freely and in a spirit deserving of the highest commendation within the
reach of the great body of the people. You are a society rendering a
real service and advantage to the public, and always most sensibly and
courteously represented by your excellent Mitchell.

Then why (proceeds our friend), don’t you treat your Lions better?

In the earnestness of his enquiry, our friend looks harder than usual
at the Bulldog. The Bulldog immediately droops and becomes embarrassed.
All dogs feel that our friend knows all their secrets, and that it
is utterly hopeless to attempt to take him in. The last base action
committed by this Bulldog is on his conscience, the moment our friend
fixes him. “What? You did, eh?” says our friend to the Bulldog. The
Bulldog licks his lips with the greatest nervousness, winks his red
eyes, balances himself afresh on his bandy forelegs, and becomes a
spectacle of dejection. He is as little like his vagabond self, as that
remarkable breed which the French call a bouledogue.

Your birds (says our friend, resuming his work, and addressing himself
again to the Zoological Society), are as happy as the day is--he was
about to add, long, but glances at the light and substitutes--short.
Their natural habits are perfectly understood, their structure is
well-considered, and they have nothing to desire. Pass from your birds
to those members of your collection whom Mr. Rogers used to call, “our
poor relations.” Of course I mean the monkeys. They have an artificial
climate carefully prepared for them. They have the blessing of
congenial society carefully secured to them. They are among their own
tribes and connexions. They have shelves to skip upon, and pigeon-holes
to creep into. Graceful ropes dangle from the upper beams of their
sitting-rooms, by which they swing, for their own enjoyment, the
fascination of the fair sex, and the instruction of the enquiring minds
of the rising generation. Pass from our poor relations to that beast,
the Hippopotamus--What do you mean?

The last enquiry is addressed, not to the Zoological Society, but to
the Bulldog, who has deserted his position, and is sneaking away.
Passing his brush into the left thumb on which he holds his palette,
our friend leisurely walks up to the Bulldog, and slaps his face!
Even we, whose faith is great, expect to see him next moment with the
Bulldog hanging on to his nose; but, the Bulldog is abjectly polite,
and would even wag his tail if it had not been bitten off in his
infancy.

Pass, I was saying (coolly pursues our friend at his easel again),
from our poor relations to that impersonation of sensuality, the
Hippopotamus. How do you provide for him? Could he find, on the banks
of the Nile, such a villa as you have built for him on the banks of the
Regent’s canal? Could he find, in his native Egypt, an appropriately
furnished drawing-room, study, bath, wash-house, and spacious
pleasure-ground, all en suite, and always ready? I think not. Now, I
beseech your managing committee and your natural philosophers, to come
with me and look at the Lions.

Here, our friend seizes a piece of charcoal and instantly produces, on
a new canvas standing on another easel near, a noble Lion and Lioness.
The Bulldog (who deferentially resumed his position after having
his face slapped), looks on in manifest uneasiness, lest this new
proceeding should have something to do with him.

There! says our friend, throwing the charcoal away, There they are! The
majestic King and Queen of quadrupeds. The British Lion is no longer
a fictitious creature in the British coat of arms. You produce your
British Lion every year from this royal couple. And how, with all the
vast amount of resources, knowledge, and experience at your command,
how do you treat these your great attractions? From day to day, I
find the noble creatures patiently wearing out their weary lives in
narrow spaces where they have hardly room to turn, and condemned to
face in the roughest weather a bitter Nor’-Westerly aspect. Look at
those wonderfully-constructed feet, with their exquisite machinery for
alighting from springs and leaps. What do you conceive to be the kind
of ground to which those feet are, in the great foresight of Nature,
least adapted? Bare, smooth, hard boards, perhaps, like the deck of a
ship? Yes. A strange reason why you should choose that and no other
flooring for their dens!

Why, Heaven preserve us! (cries our friend, frightening the Bulldog
very much) do any of you keep a cat? Will any of you do me the favour
to watch a cat in a field or garden, on a bright sunshiny day--how she
crouches in the mould, rolls in the sand, basks in the grass, delights
to vary the surface upon which she rests, and change the form of the
substance upon which she takes her ease. Compare such surfaces and
substances with the one uniform, unyielding, unnatural, unelastic,
inappropriate piece of human carpentery upon which these beautiful
animals, with their vexed faces, pace and repace, and pass each other
two hundred and fifty times an hour.

It is really incomprehensible (our friend proceeds), in you who should
be so well acquainted with animals, to call these boards--or that
other uncomfortable boarded object like a Mangle with the inside taken
out--a Bed, for creatures with these limbs and these habits. That, a
Bed for a Lion and Lioness, which does not even give them a chance of
being bruised in a new place? Learn of your cat again, and see how
_she_ goes to bed. Did you ever find her, or any living creature, go to
bed, without re-arranging to the whim and sensation of the moment, the
materials of the bed itself? Don’t you, the Zoological Society, punch
and poke your pillows, and settle into suitable places in your beds?
Consider then, what the discomfort of these magnificent brutes must be,
to whom you leave no diversity of choice, no power of new arrangement,
and as to whose unchanging and unyielding beds you begin with a form
and substance that have no parallel in their natural lives. If you
doubt the pain they must endure, go to museums and colleges where the
bones of lions and other animals of the feline tribe who have lived in
captivity under similar circumstances, are preserved; and you will find
them thickly encrusted with a granulated substance, the result of long
lying upon unnatural and uncomfortable planes.

I will not be so pressing as to the feeding of my Royal Friends
(pursues the Master), but even there I think you are wrong. You may
rely upon it, that the best regulated families of Lions and Lionesses
don’t dine every day punctually at the same hour, in their natural
state, and don’t always keep the same kind and quantity of meat in the
larder. However, I will readily waive that question of board, if you
will only abandon the other.

The time of the sitting being out, our friend takes his palette
from his thumb, lays it aside with his brush, ceases to address the
Zoological Society, and releases the Bulldog and myself. Having
occasion to look closely at the Bulldog’s chest, he turns that model
over as if he were made of clay (if I were to touch him with my little
finger he would pin me instantly), and examines him without the
smallest regard to his personal wishes or convenience. The Bulldog,
having humbly submitted, is shown to the door.

“Eleven precisely, to-morrow,” says our friend, “or it will be the
worse for you.” The Bulldog respectfully slouches out. Looking out of
the window, I presently see him going across the garden, accompanied by
a particularly ill-looking proprietor with a black eye--my prototype I
presume--again a ferocious and audacious Bulldog, who will evidently
kill some other dog before he gets home.




THE MANCHESTER STRIKE.


There can be no doubt that the judgment to be formed upon a strike
among the operatives in a great factory district, if it is to be worth
anything, must be based upon a more difficult chain of reasoning than
usually goes to the consideration of irregularities in the appointed
course of trade. Perfectly free competition regulates all prices, it
is said; and, in most callings, regulates with certainty the price
of labour. A self-adjusting power is introduced by it into the usual
machinery of commerce. So far as regards labour, the working of it is
that, as a rule, every man goes where he can get most value for such
work as he can best perform; and every man who wants labour will, to
the extent his capital allows, vie with his neighbours in attempting
to secure to his service the best labour he can meet with of the
sort he wants. That is the ordinary course of trade. Only the true
price stands, and that price being the lowest by which men of average
capabilities find that they can live, a poor trade entails secret
hardships; middling trade a bare subsistence; and none but a very brisk
trade affords chance of wealth. So it is with the price of skilled
labour; but, with the price of unskilled labour, it is scarcely so. In
each class of men possessing special capabilities, there is a given
number only, and the aim of each of their employers is to do what he
can towards securing for himself, out of that number, the best. For
the absolutely unskilled, there can be no competition when a mass
of the population, ignorant and in sore need, is pressing forward
to receive a dole of such work as it can perform; or, if there be a
competition, it is of an inverse kind--a struggle among thousands for
the food of hundreds; each striving by the most desperate offer of
cheap labour--sometimes even an hour’s work for a farthing--to secure a
portion of the necessary subsistence.

Skilled labour is, with but few exceptions, subject to an inevitable
law, with which employer and employed alike must be content to bring
their operations into harmony. But, with unskilled labour, the
compulsion set on the employer is in no proportion to that set on
the employed. Wages in that case are not regulated by a just regard
to the fair relations between capital and labour; the question among
competitors being not who shall, by paying most, attract the most
efficient class of servants, and secure the heartiest assistance;
but who shall, by paying least, take most advantage of the necessity
of people who are struggling for the chance of only a few crumbs
of the bread of independence. It thus becomes notorious enough how
it is that cheap articles are produced out of the lifeblood of our
fellow-creatures. The evil can only be corrected now, by the direct
interference of our consciences. Unwholesomely cheap production is a
perversion of the common law of trade which will in course of time be
blotted out by the advance of education; and there can never be in this
country a glut of intelligence and skill, although we may soon have a
glut of ignorance. Parallel with the advance of mind, there will run
the advance of mind-work, and the diffusion of a right sense of its
value will be increased.

Thus it will be seen, that while we believe with all our hearts in
the wholesomeness of the great principle of free competition--regard
nothing as so really helpful to the labourer, so sure to beget healthy
trade and bring out all the powers of the men engaged in it--we do
see that there is in society one class, and that a large one, upon
which, when men look, they may believe that competition is an evil. The
truth is, that the existence of that class, so helpless and so much
neglected, is the evil to remove; but while it remains--as wholesome
meat may kill a man with a disease upon him--there is an unsound body
hurt by it, requiring, O political economist! spoon-meat and medicine,
not the substantial bread and beef which doubtless theory can prove
and experience affirm, to be the best of nourishment for human bodies.
There are fevers among bodies politic as among bodies corporal, and
we are disposed to think that half the difficulties opposed to a
distinct and general perception of the truths which our economists have
ascertained, depend upon the fact that they have not yet advanced--so
to speak--from a just theory of nutrition to the formation of a
true system of therapeutics. That which will maintain health is not,
necessarily, that which will restore it. Often it happens that a
blister or a purge, though it would certainly make sound men sick, will
make the sick man whole. May it not also be that what is ruinous to
all sound trade shall hereafter come to be known as a social medicine
possessed, in certain cases, of a healing power, and applicable
therefore to some states of disordered system? We believe that a great
many discrepancies of opinion may be reconciled by a view like this.
Its justice is hardly to be questioned; although, as to the particular
applications of it, there is room for any amount of discussion.

Thus, in the case of the Manchester strike, the workmen--though not
of the unskilled class--may state that they are unable to feel the
working of the principle of competition; that if they do not get what
pay they like at one factory, they are not practically at liberty to
get the value of their labour in another. Even the population of one
mill, thrown out of work, is too large and too special, as to the
nature of the various kinds of skill possessed among its people, to
be able to find anything like prompt absorption into other factories;
but as masters almost always act in groups for the determination of
wages, it is the population, not of one mill, but that of five or six,
that becomes discontented; and the best proof of the fact that it is
practically unable to better itself even though higher wages may be
given elsewhere is, that it does not better itself. There is a curious
and decided variation in the rates of wages paid in various factories
and manufacturing towns; variations artificially increased by strikes,
but the existence of which shows, at any rate, to the satisfaction
of the operatives, that rates may be arbitrary, and that the natural
law does not work easily in their case which brings the price of any
article to its just, uniform level. The Manchester masters point out
to their men other masters who pay less than they pay; the operatives
point on the other hand, to masters paying more. But it is not in
their power to carry their own labour to those masters, as it ought
to be, for a free working of the principle of competition. Mechanical
and accidental difficulties stand completely in the way, and they are
aggravated on both sides by habits of imperfect combination. It is
just to state these difficulties, and to show that the instinct of the
operative may not be altogether reprehensible when it suggests to him
that against the worst uneasiness which he feels in the system to which
he belongs, a blister or a bloodletting, in the shape of a strike, is
the best remedy. He may be very wrong, as a man is apt to be wrong when
doctoring himself. There is an excuse for his quackery in the fact that
he has, at present, no physician to call in.

The difficulties of the case, as it is felt by employers and employed
in our manufacturing districts, is aggravated, as we have said, by
imperfect combinations; for, between the trades’ unions and the
masters’ associations there is, in truth, a perfect unity of interest.
They who reduce the master’s capital, reduce his power of employing
labour; they who wrong the labourer by whom they live, reduce his will
and power to do work. At present, men and masters are in many cases
combatants, because they never have been properly allies; they have not
been content to feel that they are fellow-workers, that the man at the
helm and the man at the oars are both in the same boat, and that the
better they agree together, the more likely they will be to weather out
a storm.

In the case of the existing strike at Manchester, we have read
carefully the manifestoes, replies, and counter-replies that have been
passing between the opposed bodies for the purpose of being laid before
the public; and the fact made in them of all others most manifest
is--that the points raised in them are points that ought to have been
raised very many months ago; discussed and understood between the
masters and the men before the strike, and for the prevention of the
strike.

Upon the precise points in dispute we cannot undertake to give a
definite opinion. From each party to the quarrel we get half a case,
and the halves are not such as the public easily will know how to
unite into a distinct whole. Rates of wages, as we have already said,
do not appear to be uniform, and while the masters in Manchester
desire, as we think, most fairly and properly, to bring a certain
class of wages, raised unduly by strikes, to its just and natural
rate, pointing to some other place in which the rate is low, the men
point to a place where the rates are higher than at Manchester, and
say, Come let us strike an average between the two. The offer is
refused. It may be necessarily and wisely refused. There are evidently
many accessory considerations that affect the nominal day’s wages in
this place and that. To the public out of Lancashire it cannot be
explained fully by manifestoes. Between masters and men, if they were
in any habit of maintaining a right mutual understanding it ought
not to be possible that any controversy about them could be pushed
to the extremity of open breach. The spinners on strike head one of
their documents with the last words of Justice Talfourd: “If I were
asked what is the greatest want in English society to mingle class
with class, I would say in one word, the want of sympathy.” Most
true; but need we say that there is sympathy due from workmen towards
employer, as well as from employer towards workmen? It is essential to
a correction of the evil thus stated that the operative should either
generously be the first to give up hostile prejudices, or that at
the least he should be altogether prompt to second, heart and soul,
every attempt of the master to establish a relation of good-will and
confidence with him. Men rarely quarrel except through what is wisely
called--misunderstanding.

There is some reason that we will not undertake to give, which causes
Lancashire, although by no means the only British factory district, to
be the district most afflicted by misunderstandings. Nowhere else are
the masters so much obstructed by the dictatorial spirit of the men;
nowhere else is the law so much interfered with, by the dictatorial
spirit of the masters. In Scotland, Yorkshire, and the west of England,
masters and men work generally well together, and the law is more or
less obeyed; machinery, for instance, not being, as a rule, obstinately
left unfenced.

Many pages of this journal have been devoted already to the
discouragement of strikes. We have urged invariably that the one
perfect remedy against them is the opening up of more and better
opportunities of understanding one another, between man and master. In
case we may be supposed to be ignorant of the feelings about which we
reason, let it be known that every thought--almost every word--upon
this subject given in the paragraphs that follow will be the thought or
word, not of a speculative person at a distance, but of a Lancashire
millowner. At the time of the disastrous Preston strike, a Preston
manufacturer, whose men stood by him honestly and well, published at
Manchester, a little pamphlet;[D] which, if its counsel had been taken,
would assuredly have made the present strike of Manchester impossible.
Mr. Justice Talfourd’s last words, placed lately by the men above their
manifesto, was then chosen as a motto by the masters. Coming, this
gentleman wrote, into Lancashire from a district where good feeling
subsisted between the employer and the employed, it was with the
utmost surprise that he found labour and capital to be in a state of
antagonism throughout the country. From the time when he first began
to employ labour in Lancashire, more than a quarter of a century ago,
he has made it his strict business to study the system at work around
him, and discover the real causes of the evils that undoubtedly exist;
and he has no hesitation in saying, that the main cause is a want of
cordial feeling--the absence, in fact, of a good understanding between
the parties to the labour-contract. This feeling must be established,
he adds, or the case never will be mended. Such understanding does
not come by any explanations from third parties; it is produced only
by direct and habitual intercourse between the parties too often at
issue. The Preston manufacturer says that no doubt the masters in
Lancashire help their men to be intelligent by spending money liberally
upon schools connected directly or indirectly with their mills. Duty
is done amply; and, for duty’s sake, too, to children; but, he adds,
what is really wanted is the education of the adult intellect. The
minds of children, having been prepared by the rudiments of knowledge
to receive ideas (whether good or evil), they are then cast adrift to
gather and continue their education by absorbing all the notions, all
the prejudices, and all the fallacies with which chance may surround
them. A dispute arises; there is no sympathy shown to the operatives
by the employers; but much real or pretended sympathy is shown by
the delegates, who tell them fine-spun theories about the results of
trades’ unions; talk to them in an inflated manner about their rights
and wrongs; tell them that a strike is the only way of battling for the
right. Such men never interfere without widening the breach, on which
they get a footing.

[D] Strikes Prevented. By a Preston Manufacturer. Galt and Co. 1854.

So far, the Preston manufacturer says what we have felt and said on
numerous occasions. Now let us see how he not only speaks, but acts,
and how the doing looks which illustrates the saying.

In the first place, minor acts of friendship to the men may be
mentioned:--He has encouraged them to form a Provident Club in
connection with his mill, and given them all help in it that would not
compromise their independence; at the same time he has encouraged them
also to support the benefit clubs out of doors. He has liked them to be
led to accumulate savings, never believing that a store of money in the
operative’s power would facilitate a strike, but rather knowing that
the provident man who has saved property will be especially unwilling
to see it dissipated. He has provided his men with a reading-room and
a lending library, and secured a fund for its support, while he has
removed a cause of soreness that exists in even well-regulated mills,
by devoting to their library the fines levied upon operatives for
faults of discipline. Such fines are necessary, and the faults for
which they are imposed cost, of course, loss to the millowner for which
they are no real compensation; nevertheless, if the master puts such
shillings into his own pocket, or, as is sometimes the case, gives them
as pocket-money to a son, experience declares that they are grudged,
and sometimes counted as extortions. Let the fine go to the common
account of the men, and the payer of it, instead of being pitied as
the victim of a tyrant, will be laughed at--thanked for his donation
to the library, and so forth. Practically, also, the result of this
system, as the Preston manufacturer has found, is to reduce the number
of the fines. Men would so much rather be victims than butts, that
acts of neglect are more determinedly avoided, though we may suggest
the general good feeling in the mill as a much better reason for the
greater care over the work.

Left to select, by a committee chosen from among themselves, the books
to be placed in their library, the men have been found to prefer those
which contained useful knowledge--such as manuals of popular science,
voyages, and histories.

So much being done to promote among the adults increasing intelligence
and good feeling, there remains the most essential thing, the
cornerstone of the whole system. It has been the practice of this
master to promote weekly discussion--meetings among the operatives in
his employment. Topics of the day, opinions of the press, the state
of trade, questions concerning competition, discoveries on practical
science or mechanics, especially such as affect the cotton-trade;
and, lastly, the conduct and discipline of their own mill, provide
plenty of matter for the free play of opinion. The master takes
every possible opportunity of being present at these meetings; and,
from what he has heard in them concerning his own mill, the Preston
manufacturer declares that he has derived substantial advantage. It
will, very often, he says, happen that the men may fancy themselves to
be suffering under a grievance which does not really exist, and which
a very little explanation will at once remove. Sometimes, too, a real
grievance may be in existence, which the employer needs only to be
informed of to remedy. In some mills, this master adds,--such is the
fear of the consequence of being thought a grumbler,--that the men will
often draw lots to determine who shall be the bearer of a complaint
which may have been long seeking expression.

With one extract we will sum up the result of the adoption of this
system. “I confess,” says the Preston manufacturer, “that, at the
time, having control of a large establishment, I cultivated a habit
of meeting and discussing questions with my workmen, both questions
affecting the public concernment, and questions relating to our
business. I confess that I derived quite as much benefit from these
discussions as they did; and how much that was, may be inferred from
the fact that, after the institution of that habit, I never had
a dispute with my operatives. And I will here say that, at those
meetings, I have heard an amount of sound and various information,
expressed with a native strength and eloquence such as would have
surprised any one not conversant with the Lancashire population. It
was from those meetings that I derived the settled conviction which I
now entertain, that the operatives do not lack the power, but only the
means, of forming sound and independent opinions.”

We believe that we employ ourselves more usefully at this juncture in
setting forth general principles like these than in any attempt, by
arbitration as third parties in a special case, to introduce that
which the Preston manufacturer declares to be only a fresh element of
discord.




THE HALL OF WINES.


If you mount the Belvedere of the Jardin des Plantes, at Paris, there
is one particular segment of the panorama which forms a very complete
and singular picture. The right-hand wing (theatrically speaking) is
formed by Jussieu’s famous cedar of Lebanon, planted by his own hands
in seventeen hundred and thirty-five; that on the left hand is a clump
of yews, firs, and miscellaneous evergreens. The heights of Montmartre
crown the horizon; the middle distance is formed by the line of houses
that constitute the quays on the right bank of the Seine, broken in
the midst by the cupolas of St. Pol, and a little to the left by the
barn-like roof of St. Louis dans l’Île. But the whole central space
of the landscape is overspread with what might be a lake of brown mud
in a half-dried and crumpled state, but which, after a second look,
proves a vast expanse of tiled roofs running in parallel rows, and
slightly diversified by the tops of trees and by scarcely visible
skylights which break up the gray-brown uniformity. That petrified
mud-lake consists entirely of the roofs which cover the famous Entrepôt
or Halle-aux-Vins, which Napoleon the First propounded (by imperial
decree) in eighteen hundred and eight, on the site of the Abbey of
St. Victor, where Abelard had listened to the lessons of Guillaume de
Champeaux, and where many good bottles of ecclesiastical wine had made
their disappearance down monkish throats.

If your curiosity is sufficiently awakened to pay the Entrepôt a nearer
visit, you will meet with much to interest. Suppose you walk down Rue
Cuvier,--perhaps one of these days we shall have Owen Street, and
Faraday Street, in London,--you will reach the Quai Saint Bernard, with
the Seine rushing rapidly to the left and in front. You will encounter
an eddying stream of pleasure and of business combined, as if the whole
population of Paris were dancing a grand Sir Roger de Coverly together;
omnibuses flitting backwards and forwards,--Hirondelles, Favorites,
Gazelles, Parisiennes; holiday parties laden with eatables, to be
washed down, outside the Barrière, by wine untaxed by octroi duty;
students and savans bent on taking notes on botany and comparative
anatomy; wine merchants and their customers with mouths in tasting
trim, bound either for the Halle itself or for Bercy beyond it; troops
of children with their nurses and grandmothers, about to spend the
afternoon in watching the monkeys; artisans’ cousins from the interior,
with hearts palpitating at the hope of beholding living lions, tigers
and boa-constrictors, for the first time in their life; not to mention
the man who cuts your portrait in black paper, with the Arab who jumps
into the air like a goat and lights on his forefeet like a sportive
tomcat, on their way to compete with the giantess, the learned pig, and
the fortune-telling pony at the foot of the bridge of Austerlitz. From
all these mundane follies the Halle-aux-Vins is secluded, in monastic
style, by a light railing covered with stout iron network, which allows
it to gaze at the Vanity Fair, while it separates it from too familiar
contact with the world. It is in the crowd--without being of it--a
convenient, friar-like, differenceless distinction. Exclusiveness,
however, of whatever kind, is more apparent than real. At the bottom of
Rue Cuvier, turn to your right, and you may enter at once, unless you
prefer walking along the Quai to the principal entrance, where there
is a letter-box, in case you have a billet-doux to post. The principal
restriction imposed upon a stranger is, that he is forbidden to smoke
amongst the eaux-de-vie.

Well, now that you are inside it, what do you think of it? Is the
wine-market of Paris like any thing else? The name of the establishment
puts the London Docks into your head; but, beyond their commercial use
and distinction, there is no more analogy between the London Docks, and
this little bit of fairy-land, than there was between the caverns of
Ætna, where Vulcan made pokers and tongs, and the slopes of Parnassus
where the Muses danced. The Halle-aux-Vins is not a building, nor a
labyrinthine cellar; it is a complete town, as perfect and unique
in its way as Pompeii itself. Once a week, indeed, it resembles the
city of the dead; it is silent, solitary, and closed. No business is
transacted there on Sundays, save only by the restless spirits which
will work unseen, and which contrive to make their escape invisibly,
however fast they may be imprisoned.

The Halle is the very concentration and impersonation of French vinous
hilarity. It would not do for port and sherry, which require a more
solid and stately residence; nor is it sufficiently whimsical and
mediæval to serve as a rendezvous for Rhenish, Austrian, and Hungarian
volunteers in the grand army of Jean Raisin. Rudesheimer, Voeslan,
Gumpoldskirchen, or Luttenberg, could not well sojourn comfortably in
any place that had not a touch of a ruined castle in its architecture.
But the Entrepôt, whose first stone was laid little more than forty
years back, no more pretends to an elderly and dignified mien than
does the Bal Mabille (by daylight) or the Château des Fleurs. It is
as tasteful and as elegant as if intended to serve as a suburban
luncheon-place, where you might call for any known wine in the world,
to be sipped under the shade of flowering shrubs, to the accompaniment
of sandwiches, sausage-rolls, and ices, handed to you by white-aproned
waiters or rosy-cheeked and smart-capped damsels.

Great part of this town consists of houses--summer-houses,
dolls-houses,--of one story, with one door, one window, and one
chimney; with room in each, for exactly one more than one inmate.
An extra apartment is sometimes contrived, by means of a bower,
which serves instead of a garden--there is none--though a great
deal of gardening is done in the Halle, in tubs, flower-pots, and
mignonette-boxes, wherein luxuriant specimens of the culture are
observable; myrtles, oleanders, lilacs, orange-trees, bay-trees, and
pomegranates, all a-growing and a-blowing. Favoured mansions possess
a garden--sometimes as much as three or four mètres square--bedecked
with roses, dwarf and standard, lilies of the valley, violets double
and single, irises displaying some of the colours of the rainbow,
hollyhocks, gilliflowers, blue-bells, and oyster-shells all in a row.
There is an abundant supply of excellent water; of course to serve no
other purpose whatever than the refreshment of the aforesaid favourites
of Flora, though people say more wine is drunk in Paris than ever comes
or came into it.

The Halle-aux-Vins houses, which put you in mind of Gulliver’s box in
Brobdingnag, are raised from the ground on separate blocks of stone,
to keep them dry, which suggests the further idea of the possibility
of their being flown away with by an eagle or roc, if they had only
a convenient ring in the roof. Of course, the houselings,--detached
and separate; no quarrelling with next-door neighbours, nor listening
to secrets through thin partition walls,--are ranged in streets,
the perusal of whose simple names is sufficient to create a vinous
thirst. What do you say to walking out of Rue de Bordeaux into Rue
de Champagne, thence traversing Rue de Bourgogne, to reach Rue de la
Côte-d’Or, and Rue de Languedoc, before arriving at Rue de Touraine!
The Barmecide’s guest would have been in ecstacies, in defiance of the
koran, at such a feast.

Moreover, to make things still more pleasant, every one of the
euphonious alleys and streets is planted with trees of different
ornamental species,--the lime, the horse-chesnut, and other arboreal
luxuries. It is a pity that the climate does not permit the growth of
cork-trees, bearing crops of ready-cut corks, including bungs, long
clarets, and champagne-stoppers. The happy mortal to whom each little
lodge belongs, is indicated by a legible inscription giving not only
the number of his isolated square counting-house, according to its
place in the alley which it lines, whether in single or in double row,
but also bearing the town-address of its tenant, and specifying the
special liquors in which he deals; thus:--“21, Mossenet, Senior, &
Cie.; Quai d’Anjou, 25. Fine wines of the Côte-d’Or cellar, Rue de
Champagne, 17.” Similar biographical sketches are given of other lords
of other summer-houses which wink at you with their Venetian blinds
behind their fences of trelliswork covered with creeping plants.

The ground-plan of the Halle-aux-Vins is formed of square blocks,
consisting of magazins, divided at right angles by the streets we have
traversed. The magazins are appropriately named after the rivers of
France along whose banks are the most famous vineyards. The Magazin du
Rhone, Magazin de L’Yonne, Magazin de la Marne, Magazin de la Seine,
and Magazin de la Loire, will serve as guides to the nomenclature of
the rest of the establishment. Five principal masses of building are
thus divided by clean-swept streets, whose most conspicuous ornaments,
besides the little thrifty fir-trees, arbor-vitæ, and junipers in
tubs, are groups of all sorts of casks lying about in picturesque
attitudes, as if they had purposely arranged themselves in tableaux
for the sake of having their portraits drawn; and drays, which are
simply long-inclined planes balancing on the axle of the wheel, on
which the casks are held by a rope tightened by a four-handled capstan.
The elevation of the Halle-aux-Vins is pyramidal in principle. The
ground-floor of the blocks is crossed by galleries from which you enter
cobwebby rather than mouldy cellars, whose more apt denomination would
be the Bordeaux word chais. Each gallery, a sort of rectangular tunnel
some three hundred and fifty metres long, is lighted by the sunshine
from a grating above, and is traversed by a wooden railway for tubs to
roll on straight and soberly. Great precautions are taken against fire.
The galleries are closed at each end by double doors of iron grating.
The sapeurs pompiers, in various ways, make their vicinity if not their
presence felt.

Other storehouses, built over the ground-floor so as to form a second
story, are tastefully surrounded with terraces, on which you are
strictly forbidden to smoke. These upper magazins are approached
from the streets by inclined planes of road-way for the use of
vehicles; pedestrians, by stepping up light iron staircases, may more
readily breathe the air of the terrace, while sounds of tapping and
wine-coopering mingle with the hum of the adjacent city, with the
passing music of some military band, or with the roar and the scream of
the captive creatures which are stared at by the crowd in the Jardin
des Plantes. Vinous and spirituous smells float in the atmosphere from
the full casks which lie about, in spite of the coating of plaster with
which their ends are covered; and we draw nigh to the vaulted magazins
of eau de vie, where every brandy-seller has his own proper numbered
store, lighted from above by little square skylights, and where roam
groups of inquisitive tasters, or spirit-rappers, anxious to pry into
secrets that are closely veiled from the vulgar herd. The sanctum
of the shrine is the Depotoir Public, or public gauging and mixing
apparatus of cylindrical receivers, and glass-graduated brandyometers,
and cranes for raising the barrels to the top of the cylinders. In
this presence-chamber of alcoholic majesty, etiquette is strictly
observed. Conformably with the rules and regulations of the Entrepôt,
the conservator apprises Messieurs the merchants that they are required
to mind their P’s and Q’s. It is no more allowable to meddle with the
machinery, or to intrude behind the mystic cylinders, than it is to
make playthings of the furniture which adorns the altar of a cathedral.

There are paradoxical facts connected with the Halle-aux-Vins which
none but the thoroughly initiated can solve. Perhaps it may afford a
clue to know that there are two emporia of wine and spirit at Paris;
one, the Halle within the barrière, and, therefore subject to the
octroi tax, and more immediately connected with the supply of the city
itself--the other, Bercy, close by, but outside the barrière, and
consequently filled with the goods yet untouched by the troublesome
impost. Large as it is, the Entrepôt is not large enough; were it
twice as big, it would all be hired. For, of all trades in Paris,
the wine-trade is the most considerable. There are now nearly seven
hundred wholesale merchants, and about three thousand five hundred
retail dealers, without reckoning the épiciers, or grocers, who usually
sell wines, spirits, and liqueurs in bottle; taking no account of the
innumerable houses where they give to eat, and also give to drink. Not
only is it the mission of Parisian commerce to moisten the throats of
the metropolis, but it is the natural intermediary of the alcoholic
beverages that are consumed in the vineyardless districts of France.
The twentieth part of the produce of the empire travels to Paris. But,
as the imposts on their arrival are very heavy and moreover press
only on the local consumption, means have been taken to store the
merchandise in such a way as not to pay the duty till the moment of its
sale to the consumer. Hence, there is established on the bank of the
Seine where Bercy stands, an assemblage of a thousand or twelve hundred
cellars and warehouses--a sort of inland bonding-place--outside the
limits of the octroi tax. These are hired by the merchants of the city
as receptacles for their stock in hand.

The buildings of the Halle-aux-Vins, within the fiscal boundary, cost
altogether thirty millions of francs, estimating the value of the site
at one third of that sum. The speculation, however, has not hitherto
responded to the hopes that were entertained at the time when it was
founded. Whether the rentals (which vary from two francs and a half to
five francs the superficial mètre), are fixed at too low a figure,
or whether the wine-merchants, disliking to be watched and hindered
in the performance of their trade manipulations, prefer their private
magazins at Bercy, the Entrepôt brings in to the city of Paris no more
than three hundred thousand francs clear a year, that is, about one per
cent for the capital employed. That Jean Raisin is somewhere made the
subject of certain mystic rites which are scrupulously screened from
public observation may be proved by the simple rules of addition and
subtraction.

The wine-trade of Paris amounts to two million two hundred thousand
hectolitres; four hundred thousand are consumed in the banlieue,
outside the barrière, and seven hundred thousand are sent away, to
supply the northern departments. What then becomes of the one million
one hundred thousand which are left at Paris? It is made into one
million four hundred thousand hectolitres! It may be calculated
from the price at the vineyard, the carriage, the taxes, and other
etceteras, that unadulterated wine, of however inferior a quality,
cannot be sold in Paris for less than half a franc, or fifty centimes,
the litre. Now, for considerable quantities retailed in cabarets, the
price is as low as forty centimes. The equilibrium is reestablished by
clandestine and fraudulent manufacture. On ordinary common wines it
is practised to the extent of increasing them on the average as much
as three-tenths. Various sweet ingredients are fermented in water.
A farmer travelling from Orleans in the same railway carriage with
myself, showed me without the slightest hesitation, or concealment,
a sample of dried pears which he was taking to Paris to sell to the
Bercy wine-brewers. Very inferior raisins, dried fruits in general, and
coarse brown sugar, enter into the magic broth. To complete the charm,
an addition is made of some high-coloured wine from the south, a little
alcohol, and a dash of vinegar and tartaric acid. Such preparations
as these are harmless enough; they become grateful to the palate that
is habituated to them; and certain adroit manipulators succeed in
producing a beverage which attains considerable reputation amongst a
wide circle of amateurs. Certainly the so-called petit Macon you get at
Paris is a most agreeable drink, when good of its kind. At respectable
restaurants, drinking it from a sealed bottle, you may reckon with
tolerable safety on its genuineness. In wine shops, where wine is drunk
from the cask, its purity is not so certain. The great test is, that
manufactured and even light wines will not keep; they must be consumed,
like a glass of soda water, as soon as they are ready for the lip. It
is said that the lamented Fum the Fourth had a bin of choice wine which
he would allow no one to taste, except on special occasions when he
chose to call for it himself. But a king, however low he may descend,
can hardly go down the cellar-steps with a bunch of keys in one hand
and a tallow candle in the other, to decant his own favourite port
and sherry. One morning, his Majesty decided that the evening’s feast
should be graced by the appearance of some of the treasured nectar. Of
course, the underlings had drunk it all themselves, except a single
bottle, which they had the marvellous modesty to leave. What was to be
done? A panting cupbearer was sent with the final remnant to procure
from a confidential purveyor to the palace something as nearly like
it as possible. “You shall have it by dinner-time,” said the friend
in need; “and by letting me know any morning, you may have more to
any extent you want. But,” said the benevolent wizard, in tones of
warning--“but, remember, it must be all consumed the same night. It
will not keep till next day.”

I hope the impromptu wine-maker was duly careful of the royal health.
But in Paris there are said to be a number of cabaretiers, who, from
the lees of wine mixed with a decoction of prunes doctored with
logwood, sugar of lead, sugar, and eau-de-vie, metamorphose wholesome
fountain-water into an infamous potion, which they shamelessly sell as
the juice of the grape. The French Encyclopédie, in its article “Vin,”
gives a large number of serviceable receipts, which may or may not have
been tested at Bercy. If effectual, their value is beyond all price.
An elixir to improve instantly the most common wine; A mode of giving
to the wine of the worst soil the best quality and the most agreeable
taste; A mode of giving to ordinary wines the flavour of Malmsey,
Muscat, Alicant, and sherry; The manner of knowing whether there be
water in the wine; The means of restoring wine that is changed; Remarks
on bottles which spoil the wine; and, The method of improving and
clarifying all sorts of wines, whether new or old; would alone be quite
sufficient to make the fortune of any man who could scrape a hundred
francs together, and with that immense capital start as Parisian
wine-merchant. The particulars of these prescriptions are unnecessary
for the reader, especially, seeing that I have given him the reference;
but I cannot resist transferring for his edification, from L’Editeur,
an Oran (Algerian) newspaper for the eighth of November last, an
advertisement, giving real names relative to the Liqueur Trasforest, of
Bordeaux:--

“This precious composition, very advantageously known for a long time
past, and recently brought to perfection by its author, gives to
wine of the most inferior crûs a delicious richness, which is easily
confounded with the true richness of the Médoc; consequently, it is
well appreciated by connoisseurs, who give it the preference over all
preparations of this nature. Messieurs the proprietors, merchants, and
consumers, who have not yet employed it, are invited to make a trial
of it; there is no doubt as to their being convinced of its excellent
properties by the advantages they will derive from it, especially to
consignments to beyond the seas. [Much obliged to the philanthropic
House of Trasforest.] A great number of retail dealers owe the
preference which they enjoy, to this aromatic liquor, which is an agent
proper for the preservation of wine, at the same time that it imparts
to it a very superior quality and value by the delicate bouquet which
it communicates.

“To employ the Liqueur Trasforest properly, you ought in the first
place to whip up the wine; let it remain about fifteen days; and not
add the Liqueur until the wine is drawn off, so that its mixture
with the wine may be perfect. After several days of rest it may be
put in bottle; the aroma keeps indefinitely. [That may mean for an
indefinitely short period.] Twenty years’ experience and success prove
that the high reputation of this excellent production is incontestably
merited. A flask suffices to perfume, bonify, and age, a hogshead
(barrique) of wine. Price one franc fifty centimes. An allowance
of twenty per cent. to wholesale dealers. Orders attended to for
ready-money payment. Beware of imitations.

“General entrepôt and special manufacture: Maison Trasforest, Rue
Dauphine, 35, and Rue Saint-Martin, 56, opposite the Cours d’Albrest,
Bordeaux. (Prepay orders and their answers.) Sole depôt in Oran at
the office of the journal L’Editeur. At the same depôt may be had
the Gelatinous Powder, for the complete, absolute, and instantaneous
clarification of white and red wines, vinegars, eaux-de-vie, and
liqueurs.”




THREE WIVES.


I have besides my town residence in Cecil Street--which is confined
to a suite of two apartments on the second-floor--a very pleasant
country-house belonging to a friend of mine in Devonshire; this latter
is my favourite seat, and the abode which I prefer to call my home. I
like it well when its encircling glens are loud with rooks, and their
great nests are being set up high in the rocking branches; I like it
when the butterflies, those courtly ushers of the summer, are doing
their noiseless mission in its southern garden, or on the shaven lawn
before its front; I like it when its balustraded roof looks down upon
a sea of golden corn and islands of green orchards flushed with fruit;
but most it pleases me when logs are roaring in its mighty chimneys,
and Christmas time is come. Six abreast the witches might ride up them,
let their broomsticks prance and curvet as they would. If you entered
the hall by the great doors while Robert Chetwood and myself were at
our game of billiards at its further end, you could not recognise our
features. The galleries are studies of perspective, and the bare,
shining staircases as broad as carriage ways. The library, set round
from the thick carpet to the sculptured ceiling with ancient books,
with brazen clasps, and old-world types, and worm-drilled bindings. The
chapel, with its blazoned saints on the dim windows, and the mighty
corridors with floors of oak and sides of tapestry, are pictures of the
past, and teach whole chapters of the book of history: Red Rose and
White Rose, Cavalier and Roundhead, Papist and Protestant, Orangeman
and Jacobite have each had their day in Old Tremadyn House. When the
great doors slam together, as they sometimes will, to the inexpressible
terror of the London butler, they awake a series of thunderclaps which
roll from basement to garret: many a warning have they given, in the
good old times, to Tremadyns hiding for their lives, and many an arras
has been raised and mirror slipped to right or left at that menacing
sound. To this day, Robert Chetwood often comes anew upon some hold
in which, those who ruled before him have skulked--sometimes in his
own reception-rooms, but more commonly in the great chambers where he
puts his guests. These chambers are colossal, with huge carved pillars
bearing up a firmament of needlework, and dressing-closets large
enough for dining-rooms. Every person of note who could or could not
by possibility of date or circumstance have slept therein have had the
credit of passing a night within Tremadyn House, from the Wandering
Jew, Shakespeare, Queen Elizabeth, down to Charles the First, Peter
the Great, and the late Emperor Nicholas. There has been more than one
murder in the Red room, several suicides in the Blue, and one ghost
still haunts those spots in expiation. Tremadyns in lace cuffs and
wigs; in scarlet and ermine; in armour from top to toe, line both the
galleries--sold by the last Charles Surface of a dissolute race for
ten pounds ten shillings a head. One great Tremadyn dynasty has passed
away; Robert Chetwood, late banker in the City of London, not so long
ago banker’s clerk, now reigneth in their stead. The Tremadyns came in
at the time of the siege of Jericho, or thereabouts, and the Chetwoods
about ten years before the siege of Sebastopol; but there the advantage
ceases. There is no man kinder to the poor, no man more courteous to
all men, no man, whatever his quarterings, in all Devonshire with
a better heart than Robert Chetwood. Tremadyn House is open to the
county, as it ever was, and his old London friends are not forgotten; a
hale and hearty gentleman indeed he is, but he has had many troubles;
he is as happy as any man bereaved of children can be, and it was the
loss of them that made him buy the house and give up his old haunts and
busy way--

    He saw the nursery windows wide open to the air,
    But the faces of the children they were no longer there;

and that, wherever it may be, is too sad a sight to look upon.

But what a wife the old man had, to make up, as it seemed even to
me, for all! I say to me, for one of those lost children, a maiden
of seventeen, was my betrothed bride--the gentlest and most gracious
creature eyes ever looked upon; I think if I could write my thoughts
of her, I should move those to tears who never saw her face, when they
read “Gertrude died.” She gave herself to me: the old man never could
have given her. I say no more.

This is why Tremadyn House has become to me a home. It pleases Robert
Chetwood to have his friend’s son with him, above all, because he was
his daughter’s plighted husband, and my father’s friend is trebly dear
to me as Gertrude’s father. When the Christmas party has dispersed, and
the great house is quite emptied of its score of guests, I still remain
with the old couple over the new year. They call me son, as though I
were their son, and I call them my parents. If Heaven had willed it
so, dear Gertrude and myself could not have hoped for greater wedded
happiness, more love between us, than is between those two. “Perhaps,”
he says, with a smile I never saw a young man wear, “perhaps it is that
my old eyes are getting dim and untrustworthy, but Charlotte seems
to me the dearest and most pleasant-looking dame in all the world.”
And his wife makes answer that her sight also is just as little to
be depended on. To each of them has come the silver hair, and the
reverence with it that alone makes it beautiful; and if their steps
are slower than in youth, it is not because their hearts are heavier;
they are indeed of those, so rare ones, who make us in love with life
down even to its close. They always seemed to me as having climbed the
hill together their whole lives long, and never was I more astonished
than upon this new year’s eve, when, Mrs. Chetwood being with us two
in after-dinner talk, as custom was when all her guests were gone, her
husband told this history. He had always talked quite openly to me,

    A pair of friends, though I was young,
    And Robert, seventy-two;

and then, at the end of another year of love and confidence, I could
not resist inquiring of them how long they two had been one.

“Well, on my word, George,” said the dear old lady, “you should be more
discreet than to ask such questions.”

But her husband answered readily:

“This thirty years. I’ve been a married man myself this half-a-century.”

“Why, you don’t mean to say----” said I.

“Yes, I do,” he interrupted. “Of course I do. Charlotte has been my
wife too long, I hope, to be jealous now of either Kate or Mary; but I
loved them each in turn almost as dearly as I love her. Charlotte,”
he added, turning towards her as she sat in the great arm-chair, “you
don’t mind George being told about my other two wives, do you?”

“I don’t mind your talking of Mary much,” she answered, “but get over
that young Kate’s story as quickly as you can, please.”

And I really thought I detected a blush come over her dear old face
while she was speaking.

“It is rather less than half a century ago,” he began, “since I first
set foot in this beautiful Devon county. I came down on a short holiday
from London, in the summer time, to fish, and I brought with me,
besides my rod and basket, a portmanteau full of clothes and about
twenty-five pounds in gold, which was the whole amount of my savings.
I was junior clerk in a house at that day, with one hundred and twenty
pounds a-year, and with as much chance of becoming a partner as you,
my dear briefless Charles, have of sitting on the woolsack. From the
top of Tremadyn House I could point you out the farm-house where I
lodged, and will some day take you to see it,--a mighty homestead, with
a huge portico of stone and flights of stone steps leading to the upper
chambers from without. On one side was the farm-yard, filled with swine
and poultry, with open stalls for cattle, and enormous barns, not so
well kept or neat, perhaps, as the present day requires, but a perfect
picture of plenty; on the other stood the cider-presses, and beyond,
the apple orchards, white with promise, red with fruit, made the air
faint with fragrance; half orchard was the garden, too, in fruit,
through which, beneath a rustic bridge, my trout stream wandered.
Charlotte, you know the place--have I not painted it?”

“You have, Robert,” she said. The tears were in her eyes, ready to
fall, I saw.

“There, then, I met Katie. The good man of the house was childless, and
she, his cousin, was well cared for as his child. It was no wonder,
George: the dark oak parlour seemed to need no light when she shone
in it. Like a sunbeam gliding over common places, whatever household
matters busied her she graced. Some sweet art seemed to lie in her,
superior to mere neatness, as high-heartedness excelleth pride. I put
on salmon flies to catch trout. I often fished without any hook at
all. I strove to image her fair face and form in the clear waters, by
the side of that hapless similitude of myself--the reflex of a forlorn
youth in his first love. I did my best at haymaking to please her. I
took eternal lessons in the art of making Devon cheese. I got at last
so far as to kiss her hand. I drew a little, and she sat to me for her
portrait. We sallied out a mushrooming and getting wild flowers, and
on our way sang pleasant songs together, and interchanged our little
stores of reading. On the eve before my long put-off departure we were
thus roaming: we had to cross a hundred stiles--the choicest blessings
of this country I used to think them--and once, instead of offering
my hand to help her over, I held out both my arms, and, upon my life,
George, the dear girl jumped right into them; and that was how I got to
kiss her cheek.”

“What shocking stories you are telling, Robert,” said Mrs. Chetwood,
and certainly she was then blushing up under her lace cap to her white
hair.

“Well, my dear, nobody was there except Kate and myself, and I think I
must know what happened, at least as well as you do: so,” he continued,
“after one more visit to the farm-house, Kate and I were married; she
gave up all her healthy ways and country pleasures to come and live
with me in the busy town; studious of others’ happiness, careful for
others’ pain; at all times forgetful of herself: active and diligent,
she had ever leisure for a pleasant word and a kind action; and for
beauty, no maid nor wife in the world was fit, I believe, to compare
with her; to you, George, who knew and loved our dearest Gertrude, I
need not describe her mother. She was not long with me, but it soon
seemed as if it must have cost my life to have parted with her; yet the
girlish glory faded, and the sparkling spirit fled, and the day has
been forgiven, though forgotten never, which took my darling Katie from
my side.”

The old man paused a little here. Mrs. Chetwood kissed him softly upon
the cheek.

“My second wife,” he resumed, “was not so young, and certainly had not
the outward graces of my first. She was beautiful, too, in the flower
as Kate was in the bud; her face had not the vivacity, nor her eyes
the dancing light of Katie’s, but there sat such a serenity upon her
features, as we sometimes see upon a lovely landscape when the sun is
near its setting; a look which no man ever tires of; and Mary bore me
children, and then, much as I had loved the sapling, it seemed to me
that the full-fruited tree was dearer yet. She was no country girl from
the Devon dales, but a town lady, bred. I had a great house by that
time, with all things fitting about me, and my sphere was hers. The
pearls suited her pleasant brow, and crowned her still raven tresses
as becomingly as the single rose in her hair had adorned simple Kate.
I think, if I may say so without ingratitude for my present great
happiness, and with the leave of my dear Charlotte, that the happiest
hours of my life were spent during those days, when our two children’s
voices rang cheerily over the house, and some little scheme of pleasure
for them was my everyday desire and Mary’s. Even at the terrible time
when boy and girl were being taken from us at once, never did their
patient mother seem more dear to me; from when the hush of sickness
stole upon us at first, to the day when that white procession left our
doors, what a healing spirit was she! When we thought that the thickly
folded veil of sorrow had fallen over us for ever, how tenderly she put
it aside!

“It must needs have happened that my speech has here been melancholy,
but indeed I should not speak of Mary so. She was the blythest,
cheerfullest, most comfortable middle-aged wife that man ever had;
behind our very darkest trouble a smile was always lying ready to
struggle through it, and what a light it shed! One of your resigned
immoveable females, who accept every blessing as a temptation, and
submit, with precisely the same feelings to what they call every
chastening, would have killed me in a week. George, my Mary acted at
all times according to her nature, and that nature was as beautiful and
blessed as ever fell to the lot of womankind. You might well think that
Kate and Mary were two prizes great enough for one man to draw out of
the marriage lottery, and yet I drew another. When I lost my beloved
Mary, my third wife took her place in my inmost heart.

“Kiss me, Charlotte,” said the old man, tenderly, and again she kissed
him on the cheek. “And now,” continued he, “let us fill our glasses,
for the New Year is coming on apace; and please to drink to the memory
of my two wives, and to the health of her who is still left to me.
The two first toasts must necessarily be somewhat painful to my dear
Charlotte, and we will, therefore, receive them in silence, but the
third we must drink with all the honours.”

So after those, he stood up, glass in hand; and said to her,

“Kate, Mary, Charlotte,--bride, matron, and dame in one, to whom I
have been wedded this half-century,--for I have had no other wife,
George,--God bless you, dear old heart! We have had a merry Christmas,
as we have ever had, and I trust it may be permitted to us to have,
still together, one more happy New Year. Hip! hip! hip! Hurrah!” and
the echoes of our three times three seemed cheerily to roam all night
about Tremadyn House.




          Now ready, Price Five Shillings and Sixpence, cloth
                                boards,

                           THE TWELFTH VOLUME
                                   OF
                            HOUSEHOLD WORDS,

Containing from No. 280 to No. 303 (both inclusive), and the extra
Christmas Number.

_The Right of Translating Articles from_ HOUSEHOLD WORDS _is reserved
by the Authors_.

Published at the Office, No. 16, Wellington Street North, Strand.
Printed by Bradbury & Evans, Whitefriars, London.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

This is from Volume XIII of the series.

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted
to the public domain.

Transcriber has generated a Table of Contents.

Apparently misspelled words have been changed:

 page 11, where “cuting” has been changed to “cutting”.
 page 14, where “frightning” has been changed to “frightening”.
 page 18, where “eightteen” has been changed to “eighteen”.
 page 21, where “Transforest” has been changed to “Trasforest”.
 page 21, where “Bourdeaux” has been changed to “Bordeaux”.
 page 22, where “Bourdeaux” has been changed to “Bordeaux”.

Punctuation anomalies have been changed:

 page 3, inserted comma after “wig”, in
   “the wig, the paralytic head”
 page 7, changed period to comma, at end of line
   “protected by a pallisade,”
 page 7, changed comma to period, at end of line
   “fortification of Bélogorsk.”
 page 16, changed hyphen to period, at end of line
   “wrong when doctoring himself.”





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOUSEHOLD WORDS, NO. 306, FEBRUARY 2, 1856 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


