The Project Gutenberg eBook of Needwood Forest
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Needwood Forest

Author: Francis Noel Clarke Mundy

Contributor: Brooke Boothby
        Erasmus Darwin
        Erasmus Darwin
        Anna Seward

Release date: February 14, 2025 [eBook #75378]

Language: English

Original publication: Lichfield: John Jackson, 1776

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEEDWOOD FOREST ***





                            NEEDWOOD FOREST.


                               LICHFIELD:

                 PRINTED BY JOHN JACKSON,  M.DCC.LXXVI.




                            NEEDWOOD FOREST.


                                PART, I.

           _Needwood!_ if e’er my early voice
           Hath taught thy echoes to rejoice;
           If e’er my hounds in opening cry
           Have fill’d thy banks with ecstacy;
           If e’er array’d in cheerful green
           Our train hath deck’d thy wintry scene;
           Ere yet thy wood-wild walks I leave,
           My tributary verse receive:
           With thy own wreath my brows adorn,
           And to thy praises tune my horn!

             What green-rob’d Nymph, all loose her hair,
           With buskin’d leg, and bosom bare,
           Steps lightly down the turfy glades,
           And beckons tow’rd yon opening shades?—
           No harlot-form, dissembling guile
           With wanton air and painted smile,
           Lures to enchanted halls or bowers,
           Where festive Vice consumes his hours.
           Her mild and modest looks dispense
           The simple charm of innocence:
           And a sweet wildness in her eye
           Sparkles with young sincerity.—
           Lead on, fair guide, ere wakes the dawn,
           With thee I’ll climb the steepy lawn,
           With thee the leafy labyrinths trace,
           Where dwells the Genius of the place.—
           His large limbs press a prim-rose bed,
           A moss-grown root sustains his head,
           And, list’ning to a Druid’s rhimes,
           He bends his eye on distant times:
           While troops of sylvan Vassals meet
           To cast their garlands at his feet,
           And pipe and frisk in rings about,
           Or parly with the Hunter’s shout.
           And now a fragrant show’r he throws
           Of blossoms from his curled brows,
           And rising waves his oaken wand,
           And bids yon magic scenes expand!—

             First blush the hills with orient light,
           And pierce the sable veil of night,
           Green bends the waving shade above,
           And glist’ring dew-drops gem the grove:
           Next shine the shelving lawns around,
           Bright threads of silver net the ground;
           And down, the entangled brakes among,
           The white rill sparkling winds along:
           Then, as the pausing zephyrs breathe,
           The billowy mist recedes beneath;
           Slow, as it rolls away, unfold
           The vale’s fresh glories green and gold;
           DOVE[1] laughs, and shakes his tresses bright,
           And trails afar a line of light.

             Now glows the illumin’d landscape round!
           Ye Vulgar hence!—’tis sacred ground!
           Hence to the flimsy walks of art,
           That lull, but not transport the heart.
           Nature, O Muse, here sits alone,
           And marks these regions for thy own;
           Here her variety of joys
           Nor season bounds, nor change destroys:
           Be mine the pride, tho’ weak my strains,
           That first I woo’d thee to these plains;
           Where Spring, in all her beauty drest,
           But promises a brighter guest:
           Where Summer yields her greens and flowers
           To Autumn’s variegated bowers:
           Smiles Winter, as their honours fall,
           And bids his hollies shame them all.[2]

             Ye sage Professors of design,
           Whom system’s stubborn rules confine,
           Can science here one blemish show?
           Or one deficient grace bestow?
           EMES,[3] who yon desart wild explor’d,
           And to it’s name the scene restor’d;
           Whose art is nature’s law maintain’d,
           Whose order negligence restrain’d,
           Here, fir’d by native beauty, trac’d
           The foot-steps of the Goddess, Taste:
           Won from her coy retreats she came,
           And led him up these paths to fame.

             Here ev’ry flower improves the gale
           From the meek violet of the vale
           To her, who flaunts in air sublime,
           The woodbine, queen of summer’s prime:
           While each delicious shade may vie
           With those of boasted Arcady.
           There sweet varieties appear
           Of thickets, shap’d by nibbling Deer,
           Of hills, that swell with gradual ease,
           Wood-skirted lawns, and scatter’d trees;
           Of vallies seen down distant glades,
           That break the mass of mingling shades;
           While nature’s attribute, extent,
           Crowns each inferior ornament!—

             On this green unambitious brow,
           Fair Mistress of the vale below,
           With sloping hills enclos’d around,
           Their heads with oaks and hollies crown’d,
           With lucky choice, by happy hands,
           Plac’d in good hour, my dwelling stands;
           And draws the distant trav’ler’s eye,
           Enamour’d of it’s scenery;
           Where all things give, what all express,
           Content and rural happiness.
           Where far retir’d from life’s dull form
           Comes no intruder but the storm;
           The storm, that with contrasted low’r
           Endears the fair the silent hour.

             Thus their wise days our fathers led,
           Fleet ran their hounds, their arrows sped,
           And jocund Health with rosy smile
           Look’d on, companion of their toil:
           Till tyrant Law usurp’d the land,
           Stretch’d o’er the woods his iron hand,
           Forbad the echoing horn to blow,
           Maim’d the staunch hound, and snapp’d the bow.[4]

             Here with fair peace and modest fame[5]
           They dwelt, who boasted Bagot’s name,—
           Go, BAGOT, plead your country’s cause,
           While senates listen with applause,
           With fearless truth and manly sense
           Detecting specious eloquence:
           Great talents to the world are due,
           Retirement were a crime in you.
           Go, and receive your oaken crown!
           Here, with no title to renown,
           Leave me to loiter at my door
           Beneath the spreading sycamore,
           That canopies the sloping lawn;
           And view the deer at early dawn
           In troops come winding down the hill
           To taste fresh herbage near the rill;
           Or count at noon their slumb’ring heaps;
           At evening watch their playful leaps;
           Or hear the quiring of the grove
           Give breath to harmony and love;
           Or listen to the hum profound,
           In the still air that floats around;
           Or mark yon hills extended side,
           Where turf and shade the space divide;—
           Here the wood straggles tow’rd the plain,
           The pasture there prevails again;
           The heifer grazes on it’s brow,
           Clamours the rook on trees below;
           Gay golden furze and purple ling
           Around their mixt embroidery fling,
           O’er all, irregularly join’d,
           Th’ according outline waves behind.

             No dusky Cares o’er-hang the bower,
           No Passions wreck the halcyon hour;
           Nurs’d in the shade Reflection springs,
           Smooths her white plumes, and tries her wings.
           No leaf of autumn falls in vain;
           No flower-bell droops beneath the rain,
           No bubble down the current flows,
           But life’s uncertain tenure shows.
           Those thorns protect the forest’s hopes;
           That tree the slender ivy props:
           Thus rise the mighty on the mean!
           Thus on the strong the feeble lean!
           In yonder holly—blush mankind!—
           A rare fidelity I find;
           Like yours tho’ summer’s flatteries end,
           My winter here hath found a friend.—
           Hail faithful fav’rite tree! to you
           The Muse shall pay observance due:
           Whether in horrent files you stand
           Round sapling oaks a guardian band;
           Or form aloft a shelt’ring bower
           Impervious to the sun or shower;
           Whether to yon hill-side you throng
           Ranging in various groups along;
           Or on the plain, maturely grown,
           You boldly brave the storm alone,
           Or tapering high, with woodbines hid,
           Rise in a fragrant pyramid;
           Your vigorous youth with upright shoots,
           Your verdant age, your glowing fruits,
           Your glossy leaves, and columns gray
           Shall live the favorites of my lay!

             Alas! in vain with warmth and food
           You cheer the songsters of the wood,
           The barbarous boy from you prepares
           On treacherous twigs his viscous snares.
           Yes, the poor bird, you nurs’d, shall find
           Destruction in your rifled rind.
           Thus good and ill too often meet,
           And bitter mingles with the sweet!
           —Ye pedagogues! let truant youth
           Imbibe from you this gen’rous truth;
           That one humane, one tender thought
           Is worth the whole, that schools have taught.


                               PART, II.

            With what fond gaze my eye pursues,
            _NEEDWOOD_, thy sweetly-varying views!
            Satyr, or Nymph, or sylvan God
            A fairer circuit never trod!
            Charm’d, as I turn, thy pictures seem
            The golden fabricks of a dream.
            Where Fiction stands with prism bright,
            Rays forth her many-colour’d light,
            Dyes the green herb, and purple flower,
            Gives glittering lustres to the shower;
            Then gilds with livelier tints the sky,
            Or bends her radiant bow on high.

              To scenes so elegantly wild
            Fancy, of old, her darling child
            From AVON’S flowery margin brought,
            And ARDEN boasts what NEEDWOOD taught.[6]

              Such shades by mazy paths perplex’d,
            Where strays the traveller inly vex’d,
            Inspir’d the Muse of SPENCER’S pen;
            The _wandering wood_, and _Errors den_,[7]
            Dwarfs, Palfreys, Dames, and Giants rise
            Full on Imaginations eyes!
            See, See the Sarazin advance!
            The red-cross Knight hath couch’d his lance!
            They meet, the Christian wins the field,
            And bears away the _faithless_ shield![8]

              With such companions fond to rove,
            I venerate each hill and grove,
            To Phœbus as to Dian dear,
            And find a new Parnassus here.
            Here might the sacred sisters dwell
            By pebbly brook, or gushing well:
            O let me listen, as they sing,
            In some close vale beside a spring,
            Whose stream the intruding alder chides,
            Where the wild-bee her treasure hides!—
            Or sit in high imbowering shade
            With Contemplation, heav’n-ey’d maid,
            Where the scant sun through branches thin
            Chequers the dark green floor within;
            Where ev’ry leaf is wisdom’s page,
            And each gray trunk a hoary sage.
            Nor motion, human form, or noise
            This solemn pause of life destroys;
            Save where the playful squirrel bounds,
            Or ring-dove pours her plaintive sounds,
            Or lurking peasant lops an oak
            Restraining half his pilfering stroke,
            Or with his faggot stoops to rest
            Both by his years and burthen prest.

              Here, seen of old, the elfin race
            With sprightly vigils mark’d the place;
            Their gay processions charm’d the sight,
            Gilding the lucid noon of night;
            Or, when obscure the midnight hour,
            With glow-worm lantherns hung the bower.
            —Hark!—the soft lute! along the green
            Moves with majestic step the queen!
            Attendant Fays around her throng,
            And trace the dance or raise the song;
            Or touch the shrill reed, as they trip,
            With finger light and ruby lip.

              High, on her brow sublime, is born
            One scarlet wood-bine’s tremulous horn;
            A gaudy bee-bird’s triple plume[9]
            Sheds on her neck its waving gloom;
            With silvery gossamer entwin’d
            Stream the luxuriant locks behind.
            Thin folds of tangled network break
            In airy waves adown her neck:
            Warp’d in his loom, the spider spread
            The far-diverging rays of thread,
            Then round and round with shuttle fine
            Inwrought the undulating line.
            One rose-leaf forms her crimson vest,
            The loose edge crosses o’er her breast.
            And one translucent fold, which fell
            From the tall lily’s ample bell,
            Forms with sweet grace her snowy train,
            Flows, as she steps, and sweeps the plain.
            Silence and Night inchanted gaze,
            And Hesper hides his vanquish’d rays!—

              Now the wak’d reed-birds swell their throats,
            And night-larks trill their mingled notes:
            Yet hush’d in moss with writhed neck
            The black-bird hides his golden beak;
            Charm’d from his dream of love, he wakes,
            Opes his gay eye, his plumage shakes,
            And stretching wide each ebon wing,
            First in low whispers tries to sing;
            Then sounds his clarion loud, and thrills
            The moon-bright lawns, and shadowy hills.
            Silent the choral Fays attend,
            And then their silver voices blend,
            Each shining thread of sound prolong,
            And weave the magic woof of song.
            Pleas’d Philomela takes her stand
            On high, and leads the fairy band,
            Pours sweet at intervals her strain,
            And guides with beating wing the train.
            Whilst interrupted zephyrs bear
            Hoarse murmurs from the distant wear;
            And at each pause is heard the swell
            Of Echo’s soft symphonius shell.

              Nor the dread night my mind alarms,—
            NIGHT, and her horrors have their charms.
            O’er the wide forest oft I roam,
            What time the trav’ler, far from home,
            Bewilder’d in the pathless brakes,
            There his cold bed despairing makes;
            And hear the fox with savage bark
            Pay distant courtship through the dark;
            The owl with fault’ring voice unfold
            Her tale, like one who shakes with cold:
            And then the alarmed woods resound
            Th’ upbraidings of the well-train’d hound,
            Who with tremendous tongue arraigns
            And haunts the plunderer of his plains.
            So cries from earth the life-blood spilt,
            So waking furies harrass guilt!

              Oft have I through this solemn glade
            Of old dismember’d hollies stray’d,
            Whose bold bare rugged brows are seen
            Thrust through the mantling ever-green;
            Tall clustring columns here ascend,
            And there in gothic arches bend;[10]
            Whilst, as the silver moon-beams rise,
            Imagin’d temples strike my eyes,
            With tottering spire, and mouldering wall,
            And high roof nodding to its fall.—
            His lantern gleaming down the glade,
            One, like a sexton with his spade,[11]
            Comes from their caverns to exclude
            The mid-night prowlers of the wood.—
            Through fields of air while pausing slow,
            Yon death-bell tells the village woe!

              Born on her clouds when Darkness flings
            O’er the still air her raven wings,
            Ere yet the watery freight descends,
            While Heaven it’s purposes suspends,
            NIGHT, let me stand in silent trance,
            And watch the lightning’s kindling glance:
            While, stiff’ning at the imagin’d stroke,
            Appears behind a brighten’d oak,
            From justice fled to this wild place,
            A conscious robber’s gastly face!—
            Or fancy views with fear-fix’d eye
            A mangled spectre gliding by,
            Quick with the flash who seems to wave
            His pale hand, beck’ning to a grave!—
            And, as the fleeting vision dies,
            Loud thunders shake the closing skies.

              NIGHT, when rude blasts thy scenes deform,
            O place me in the perilous storm!
            While the moon labouring thro’ the clouds
            By turns her light reveals and shrouds;
            Torn from it’s trunk, when whirlwinds bear
            The twisted ash aloft in air:
            And some vast elm’s uprooted spoil
            Ploughs in its headlong fall the soil.
            While, as he stalks thro’ groaning oaks,
            At intervals the old deer croaks:
            And the lean sow with paps drawn dry
            O’er rustling leaves trots whining by.—

              Then posts across the blasted plain,
            Born on the wild storm, Witchcraft’s train,
            Aghast with guilt, and shrunk with age,
            And yelling with demoniack rage!—
            With eyes turn’d back malign and wide
            See blood-stain’d Murder silent stride,
            A moon-beam’s sudden light expands,
            He starts, and hides his crimson hands!—
            And now the cauldron gleams afar,
            Fir’d by a baneful meteor’s glare,
            Around they dance, they pause, and pour
            The mischiefs of the midnight hour;
            While trembling fiends with wonder gaze,
            Stretch their black wings, and fan the blaze!


                               PART, III.

           Ere Night withdraws her starry train,
           I print long traces o’er the plain,
           And bend my eyes to yon bright east
           To meet the Morning’s radiant guest,
           As o’er the hill his golden rays
           Burst thro’ the thicket in a blaze.
           Now from my foot the startled fawn
           Bounds to its parent on the lawn;
           And the wak’d lark exulting springs,
           Hangs high in air on quivering wings,
           Chaunts his loud transports o’er the heath,
           And eyes his list’ning loves beneath.

             Oft shall my TALBOT hither stray,
           And friendship give new joys to day;
           On him his blooming bride attend,
           Hither her graceful footsteps bend,
           Fresh life her brighter beauties fling
           O’er the young dawn, and blossom’d spring.

             They come! their eddying wheels resound,
           The harness’d coursers proudly bound,
           The light-hung chariot floats in air,
           And laughing Hymen wreaths the pair!
           As o’er the daisy’d lawns they move
           By glittering rill or dusky grove,
           Old NEEDWOOD calls his softest gale,
           Bids all his fragrant buds exhale:
           His gazing herds around them throng,
           His plighted birds suspend their song,
           Each on her urn his Naiads lean,
           And Wood-nymphs peep from allies green.

             Where this gay mount o’er-looks the wood,[12]
           Charm’d with the scene a monarch stood,
           Call’d these fair plains the richest gem,
           That deck’d his triple diadem,
           Awhile the cares of state forgot,
           And with it’s name adorn’d the spot.

             Down yon meridian fields afar
           When Mercia led her chiefs to war,
           Fell in one hour three monarchs brave,
           And LICHFIELD’S bower protects their grave.[13]
           Her stately spires amidst the skies
           Ting’d by the orient sun arise,
           With golden vanes invite the gale.—
           Triumphant ladies of the vale!

             Down yon mid-vale the british Nile,[14]
           Fair DOVE, comes winding many a mile;
           And from his copious urn distils
           The fatness of a thousand hills.
           Swell, generous river, leave thy banks,
           The thirsty soil shall give thee thanks!—
           The generous river swells, and leads
           His waters o’er impoverish’d meads,
           And lays his ample treasure down,
           Rich emblem of thy bounty, BROWN![15]

             Pleas’d on yon high abode I gaze,
           Whence C’ANDISH foaming Dove surveys:[16]
           And where those humbler vales extend
           Of thine, FITZHERBERT, chearful friend.[17]
           Or mark upon yon round ascent
           The social flag and open tent,[18]
           Where life’s smooth paths with sweets are strown,
           And mirth makes every hour it’s own.

             Where spreads this grove it’s umbrage wide
           Late the bold Outlaw fought and died.[19]
           Oft in it’s dark recess the oak
           Had fall’n beneath his secret stroke,
           Full many a deer the night’s dim ray
           Beheld his silent arrow slay,
           Deep furze conceal’d the fawns in vain,
           And lust of lucre thinn’d the plain.
           Here, by no power before controll’d,
           He met a forester as bold;
           O’er the fierce conflict frown’d the wood,
           And drank with thirsty roots his blood.

             Yon bank demands a pitying look,
           Where life a gentler breast forsook;[20]
           Sole comfort of an aged pair!
           The true-love of a damsel fair!—
           At prime of dawn he stepp’d away;
           Long was the journey, short the day;
           The wint’ry blast blew loud and chill;
           Night caught him on the unshelter’d hill;
           Fatigu’d he fell; no help came nigh;
           His faithful dog alone was by;
           Who, as he fondly lick’d his cheek,
           Heard his expiring master speak.
           “Heap not for me thy cottage-fire;
           “Cold grows my heart, unhappy sire!
           “But turn to my unfinish’d loom,
           “And weave the web, and bear it home!
           “Prepare not, dame, my evening meal;
           “But bid them ring my passing peal!
           “Deck not thyself, dear maid, to meet
           “Thy love; but bring his winding sheet!
           “I come not to your festive cheer;
           “Ye comrades, place me on my bier!—”
           —The morrow found him stiff and pale:
           Mournful the Muse recounts his tale.

             Her stately tower there HANBURY rears,
           Which proudly looks o’er distant shires;
           Down the chill slope and darken’d glade
           Projects afar it’s length of shade;
           Assails the skies with giant force,
           And checks the whirlwind in it’s course;
           Or, when black clouds involve the pole,
           Disarms the thunders, as they roll!—
           Beneath how Nature throws around
           Grand inequalities of ground,
           While down the dells and o’er the steeps
           The wavy line of Paphos creeps!—

             With awful sorrow I behold
           Yon cliff, that frowns with ruins old;[21]
           Stout FERRERS there kept faithless ward,[22]
           And GAUNT perform’d his Castle-guard.[23]
           There captive MARY look’d in vain[24]
           For NORFOLK, and her nuptial train;
           Enrich’d with royal tears the Dove,
           But sigh’d for freedom, not from love.
           ’Twas once the seat of festive state,
           Where high born dames and nobles sat;
           While minstrels, each in order heard,[25]
           Their venerable songs preferr’d.
           False memory of it’s state remains
           In the rude sport of brutal swains.[26]
           Now serpents hiss, and foxes dwell
           Amidst the mould’ring citadel;
           And time but spares those broken towers
           In mockery of human powers.

             Yon hill, that glows with southern rays,[27]
           All-conscious of superior praise,
           Swells her smooth top and pastures green,
           And of her sisters seems the queen;
           Proud from her ancient seats to trace
           The lineage of a generous race.
           “That generous race,” fair SUDBURY cries,
           “Is mine,” and bids her turrets rise,
           Lifts from the lap of peace her dome,
           Where finds Munificence a home;
           Then wide her shining lake she leads
           Through blossom’d groves and emerald meads,
           Cloaths with dark woods the distant scene,
           And pours her dappled herds between.
           —Ah me! what sudden sadness lowers
           O’er her fair front and vernal bowers!
           There sinks to her untimely tomb
           A virgin flower in beauty’s bloom!
           O thou wast all that youth admires,
           A parent loves, or friend desires!
           I knew thee well! my sorrowing heart
           Bears in thy loss a bitter part!—
           Whilst the sad Muse in plaintive verse
           Strews all her flowers around thy hearse,
           Let Pity quit thy grave, and go
           A mourner to yon house of woe.
           There from thy father’s bosom break
           Sighs, which too eloquently speak:
           Thy mother weeps, but weeps resign’d,
           In all things noble, most in mind:
           Pale griefs thy sisters’ cheeks invade;
           And one, alas, too tender maid!
           Holds a long melancholy strife
           Betwixt her sorrows and her life:
           Thy manly brothers strive to cure
           In vain, the pangs themselves endure.
           Fair Saint! a happier lot is thine
           Repos’d beneath the silent shrine!

             Now let me seek in pensive mood
           The rude recesses of the wood;
           And, where congenial gloom extends,
           Think of lost hopes and distant friends;
           Of scenes, whose pleasures fled too fast,
           And hours most valued now they’re past!

             Beside me lies a dingle deep,[28]
           With shaggy banks abrupt and steep;
           Through vistas wild my course I bend,
           Till day-light opens at the end:
           Where from intoxicating height
           Bursts the wide prospect on my sight.
           The terrace bold, on which I stand,
           Steps broad and forward on the land;
           Rude hills compose the side-long scene,
           With crofts and cottages between:
           The various landscape onward spreads
           O’er cultur’d plains and verdant meads;
           And seats, and towns, and hamlets rise,
           Where yon smoke curls into the skies,
           And spires, that pierce thro’ tufted trees;
           Till, faintly fading by degrees,
           Beyond, in wild confusion tost,
           The hills blue tops in clouds are lost.

             Yes, EATON-BANKS, in vain I strive[29]
           To hide the grief your oaks revive.—
           Bow thy tall branches, grateful wood!
           Afford me blossom, leaf, and bud!
           He, for whose memory these I blend,
           Thy late-lost master, was my friend!—
           Fall, gentle dews! fresh zephyrs, breathe!
           Spread, cooling shades! preserve my wreath!—
           Alas, it withers ere its time!—
           So faded he in manly prime!—
           But Virtue, scorning friendship’s aid,
           Rears her own palms, which never fade!


                               PART, IV.

            Henry, O leave, whilst youth is ours,[30]
            And health leads on the fleeting hours,
            O leave awhile the court you grace,
            And urge with me the sylvan chase!

              Oft, as I bathe in morning’s breath,
            Ere wakes the plover on the heath,
            Ere the sun robs the woodbine’s smell,
            Or dries the fox-glove’s purple bell,
            I hear the deep-mouth’d thunder rise;
            The monarch of the woodland flies,
            Whilst the loud triumphs of the horn
            On breezy wings are backward born.[31]
            His subject mates no succour lend;
            What tyrant ever found a friend?
            He dies!—the satiate echoes cease;
            The forest reassumes its peace.

              Now sun-burnt Autumn with his spoils
            Diana’s bleeding altar piles:
            Again the slaughtering gun is heard,
            And wildly screams the parent bird;
            All night she mourns her lessen’d brood,
            Still views them fluttering in their blood,
            With timorous call the rest collects,
            And with quick wing their flight directs.
            Now the strong buck his rival drives,
            And awes with jealous threats his wives:
            Slow move the kine to fresher fields;
            The hawthorn to the holly yields:
            No twittering swallow skims the plain,
            No shrite-cock tunes his echoing strain:[32]
            Dumb are the full-plum’d songsters all,
            Save the lone red-breast on my wall;
            Thy tender lay, sweet bird, prolong,
            And sooth old Winter with thy song!

              When wintry mists obscure the skies,
            His busy nose the spaniel plies,
            Where mossy glades and thickets brown
            Tempt the far-wandering wood-cock down:
            Stretch thy strong wing, thy flight retake,
            Nor trust the inhospitable brake!—
            Ah, forc’d from the luxuriant ground,
            He mounts, and feels the sudden wound.
            So transmeridian Zealand views
            Adventurous Europe’s wandering crews:
            Fierce hunger eyes the stranger-guest,
            And fraud secures the barbarous feast;
            Stain’d are the rocks with human gore,
            And white with scatter’d bones the shore.

              The leveret—but I spare the rest,
            I see compassion touch thy breast—
            Come then, and whilst the murderous crew
            In harmless blood their hands imbrue,
            Rous’d to revenge by ravag’d flocks,
            Haste we to find the kennell’d fox.
            Hark! those preluding cries he hears;
            Thick beats his heart with conscious fears.
            Some tyrant thus, in luckless hour
            Whom fraud or force has rais’d to pow’r,
            With throbbing heart and pale eye stands,
            And spreads to heaven his harpy hands,
            When Freedom’s voice alarms the morn,
            And Vengeance winds her echoing horn.
            See, with the wind he scours away
            Sleek, and in crimes grown old and gray!
            Oft has he foil’d our angry pack,
            I know his customary track.
            Talk not of pity to such foes!
            Stern justice claims the life he owes.
            No storms arise to screen his flight;
            ’Tis long till interrupting night;
            The breathing South his sentence gives,
            And not an hour the caitiff lives!
            Through woods, and hills, and vales, and brakes,
            NEEDWOOD with general transport shakes.
            Mark how the pack diffusely spread,
            And shew me, if you can, their head!
            ’Tis here—’tis there—now onward far
            Streams down the vales irregular.
            As through the furzy brakes they drive
            The trembling coverts seem alive.
            Thus by the winds o’er bending corn
            Loose waves of light and shade are born.
            Now winding up yon steep they strain;
            Now wheel in silence on the plain:
            Again they catch the tainted wind;
            No hound disgraceful lurks behind:
            All striving with confederate aim,
            Their size, their power, their speed the same,
            With eager eye and clamorous tongue
            In broad career they press along,
            Fierce on their victim gathering round—
            —He suffers by no single wound!
            Thus o’er the azure fields of night
            Shoot the quick rays of northern light,
            To one bright point converg’d they flow,
            And round the silver zenith glow.
            So, when a lake surcharg’d by rain
            Bursts, and o’erwhelms the sloping plain,
            The wond’ring rustic flies, nor knows
            Which of its currents fastest flows;
            Now here the rattling eddies lead,
            Now there they foam along the mead,
            Till in a silent pool they stand,
            Collected on the hollow land.

              Go languid fops, go pedants, waste
            Your sneers on joys you cannot taste;
            And cloak with many a vain pretence
            Cold-blooded fear and indolence!

              Warm to each elegant delight,
            Ingenious, sensible, polite,
            Known to the world you know so well,
            Lov’d e’en by those whom you excel,
            MEYNELL, my leader and my friend,
            Stand forth! the manly chase defend!
            O raise your animating voice,
            And cheer the Dian of your choice!
            Not her, whose foul Circean draft
            ’Squires of preceding ages quaff’d,
            Unletter’d reveller, whose joys
            Were rudeness, turbulence, and noise,
            But her, no less of British kind,
            Well-bred, intelligent, refin’d,
            Of younger years and purer mold,
            Chaste as the Huntress Queen of old.

              Yes, I am thine, enchanting maid!
            Come, in thy decent robes array’d!
            O bring thy blithe companion, Health,
            Who smiles, and mocks the sluggard Wealth;
            And Hope, who spleen and care destroys;
            And Rapture scorning tamer joys;
            Young Eagerness with kindling eyes;
            And Triumph mingling jocund cries!

              Come, as thy cheerful train is seen,
            Where FOREMARKE waves his woodlands green;
            When hears his vale thy matin song,
            And TRENT exulting shouts along:
            While wait, thy gay return to greet,
            Convivial Mirth and Welcome sweet.—
            On me, thy humbler votary, shower
            The balmy dews of every flower,
            Which oft thy curious hand has twin’d
            Thy BURDETT’S favour’d brows to bind!


                                PART, V.

           Whence, NEEDWOOD, that tremendous sound!—
           —Low dying murmurs run around,
           A deeper gloom the wood receives,
           And horror shivers on the leaves,
           Loud shriekes the hern, the raven croaks—
           Destruction’s arm arrests thy oaks![33]
           Onward with giant strides he towers,
           Dooms with dread voice thy withering bowers,
           High o’er his head the broad axe wields,
           Stamps with his iron foot, and shakes the fields!

             When from her lawless rocks and sands
           Arabia pours her ruffian bands,
           The village hinds in wild distress
           Around some holy hermit press
           Orb within orb, their wrongs declare,
           And ask his counsel and his prayer;
           All white with age, inspir’d he stands,
           And lifts to heaven his wrinkled hands!
           So seems the affrighted forest, drawn
           In crowds around this lonely lawn:
           High in the midst with many a frown
           Huge SWILCAR shakes his tresses brown,[34]
           Out-spreads his bare arms to the skies,
           The ruins of six centuries,
           Deep groans pervade his rifted rind—
           —He speaks his bitterness of mind.
           “Your impious hands, barbarians, hold!
           “Ye pause! but fir’d with lust of gold,
           “Your leader lifts his axe, and like
           “Accursed JULIUS, bids you strike.[35]
           “Deaf are the ruthless ears of gain,
           “And youth and beauty plead in vain.
           “—Loud groans the wood with thick’ning strokes!
           “Yes, ye must perish, filial oaks!
           “In heaps your wither’d trunks be laid,
           “And wound the lawns, ye used to shade;
           “Whilst Avarice on the naked pile
           “Exulting casts a hideous smile.
           “Strike here! on me exhaust your rage,
           “Nor let false pity spare my age!
           “No pity dwells with sordid slaves;
           “’Tis want of worth alone that saves.
           “Yes, ye will leave me with disdain
           “A mouldring land-mark on the plain,
           “Where many a reign my trunk hath stood
           “Proud father of the circling wood.
           “In freedom’s dearest days I grew,[36]
           “And HENRY’S jealous nobles knew;
           “I saw them pierce the bounding game,
           “And heard their horn announce the claim.
           “No more, beneath my favorite shade,
           “The forest youth and village maid
           “Shall meet to plight their troth, and mark
           “Their loves memorial on my bark.

             “Yet, yet, fond Hope, thy distant light[37]
           “Beams unexpected on my sight;
           “Lo VERNON hastes, the common friend!
           “The affrighted forest to defend;
           “Bids the keen axe the saplings spare,
           “And makes posterity his care.
           “Yes, Joy shall see these scenes renew’d,
           “Shall wake his sister Gratitude,
           “Shall call on lawns and hills and dells
           “The silent echoes from their cells,
           “Long trains of golden years proclaim,
           “And NEEDWOOD ring with VERNON’S name.”

             He ceas’d, and shook his hoary brow:
           Glad murmurs fill the vale below,
           The deer in gambols bound along,
           The plighted birds resume their song.

             Thrice-venerable Druid, hail!
           O may thy sacred words prevail,
           May NEEDWOOD’S oaks successive stand
           The lasting wonder of the land!—
           And may some powerful bard arise,
           Tho’ heaven to me that power denies,
           The POPE or DENHAM of his days,
           Whose lofty verse shall match their praise.


                                _FINIS._




                                ADDRESS
                                   TO
                              SWILCAR OAK,
                               DESCRIBED
                          IN MR. MUNDY’S POEM
                                   ON
                            NEEDWOOD FOREST,


          Hail, stately oak, whose wrinkled trunk hath stood
          Age after age, the sov’reign of this wood;
          You, who have seen a thousand springs unfold
          Their ravell’d buds, and dip their flowers in gold;
          Ten thousand times yon moon relight her horn,
          And that bright eye of evening gild the morn.

            Say, when of old the snow-hair’d druids pray’d
          With mad-ey’d rapture in your hallow’d shade,
          While to their altars bards and heroes throng,
          And crouding nations join the ecstatick song;
          Did e’er such dulcet notes arrest your gales,
          As MUNDY pours along the list’ning vales?

            Yes, stately oak, thy leaf-wrapp’d head sublime
          Erelong must perish in the wrecks of time;
          Shou’d o’er thy brow the thunders harmless break,
          And thy firm roots in vain the whirlwinds shake,
          Yet must thou fall,—thy withering glories sunk,
          Arm after arm shall leave the mould’ring trunk!

            But MUNDY’S verse shall consecrate thy name,
          And rising forests envy SWILCAR’S fame:
          Green shall thy gems expand, thy branches play,
          And bloom for ever in the immortal lay.

                                                      E. D.




                                   A
                           RURAL CORONATION,
                        Inscribed to Mr. MUNDY,
                          On reading his POEM
                                   ON
                            NEEDWOOD FOREST.


             Haste from your dells, your woods, and lawns,
             Nymphs, Naiads, Satyrs, Fays, and Fauns,
             Haste! hither bring your flowers and boughs,
             And weave a wreath for MUNDY’S brows!

               First twigs of oak from SWILCAR rend,
             And round his auburn temples bend;
             Then tye the ends, that twisting meet,
             With tendrils from the wood-bine sweet:
             With laurel-blossoms next be spread
             Pale ivy crosswise o’er his head;
             These holly sprigs insert between,
             —The berries blush amid the green—
             While hare-bells blue, and lilies fair,
             Mix’d with the wild-rose, deck his hair.

               Now with fantastick step advance,
             And hand in hand around him dance;
             To oaten pipe attune his lays,
             And hail the bard, who sings your praise.
             “While the gay choirings of the grove
             “Give breath to harmony and love,
             “And golden furze and purple ling
             “Around their mix’d embroidery fling,
             “And, all irregularly join’d,
             “Th’ according outline waves behind.”

                                                     A. S.




                                SONNET.


         Mundy, whose song hath taught the forest swain
         To view fair NEEDWOOD thro’ the radiance clear
         Of bright imagination, taught the tear
         To glisten in his eye for other’s pain,
         And own that taste and virtue are not vain,
         How was thy pipe melodious wont to cheer
         The wintry groves, when every leaf was sear,
         And brighten summer with its artful strain!—
         Say, by what meed shall NEEDWOOD court thy stay?
         She unsuspecting twines in amorous care
         Her favorite holly and her flower-bells gay,
         To deck with modest hand her lover’s hair,—
         Ah, do not thou her gentle hope betray,
         And doom her tender bosom to despair!

                                                         B. B.




                  _On_ Mr. MUNDY’s _Needwood Forest_.


           Where NEEDWOOD’S banks embroidered smile
           On bright-hair’d Dove, the british Nile,
           Pleas’d MUNDY fix’d his easel strong,
           And stretch’d his canvass wide and long;
           Broad o’er his hand the pallet lies
           With pencils for a thousand dyes.
           He look’d, and drew, and look’d again,—
           —Enamour’d Fancy snatch’d the pen,
           Nymphs, Graces, Loves around him throng,
           With all the sisterhood of song:
           Bright tints by fairy hands were mix’d.
           And Witchcraft etch’d the shades betwixt.

             Delighted Flora smil’d and drew
           The primrose pale, and violet blue.
           A Naiad spreads the flake of snow,—[38]
           White foams the glittering stream below.
           “Give me the pallet,” Love demands,
           And stretching forth his baby hands
           Dip’d with nice touch his keenest shaft
           In all the blushing lakes, and laugh’d;[39]
           With sweetest grace the pencil flow’d,
           With softest tints the canvass glow’d;
           “I’ll draw Mamma,” the Wanton cries,
           And TALBOT’S features charm our eyes!
           With airy ease the white neck bends,
           Lock after lock the hair descends:
           O’er the fair form the Graces spread
           Their vest, and Hymen wreaths the head.

             And then Thalia, muse of woe,
           Moves o’er the woof her crayon slow.
           Here, cold, bewilder’d, tir’d, forlorn,
           The Traveller sighs in vain for morn;
           Stretch’d on the imprinted snow he lies,
           And bends on heaven his stiffening eyes.
           There Friendship sits the shade beneath,
           And twines for CLARKE a fadeless wreath;
           Fresh cypress with the flowers she weaves,
           And many a tear-drop gems the leaves.
           Next o’er the lawn a virgin throng
           In sad procession moves along,
           Lorn Loves inverted torches bear,
           And Pity weeps o’er VERNON’S bier.

             To shade the distant ground, and lay
           The rising group in bolder day,
           A Dryad chalks some dusky strokes,—
           Behind umbrageous frown her oaks!
           And SWILCAR, rent by many a storm,
           Rears high in air his leafless form.

             Pleas’d MUNDY stood with eager eyes,
           And watch’d the living figures rise;
           Smil’d as the varying colours flow’d,
           And sigh’d by turns, and chill’d, and glow’d:
           And to the admiring world has shewn
           The immortal tablet for his own.

                                                   E. D. Jun.

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




                                  THE
                                  FALL
                                   OF
                               NEEDWOOD.


                                =Derby:=

                  PRINTED AT THE OFFICE OF J. DREWRY.

[Illustration]

                                 1808.




                         THE FALL OF NEEDWOOD.


           Ah, Needwood! I, whose early voice
           Taught thy shrill echoes to rejoice;
           I, who first pour’d the sylvan song
           Thy glades, thy banks, thy lawns along;
           I, who with artless pencil drew
           Thy Forest charms of varied hue,
           Approach thee now with different strain,
           That mourns thy wrongs, yet mourns in vain:
           I come, but not with former haste,
           To view the dim unshelter’d Waste,
           That once was Needwood: on thy brow
           No green-rob’d Wood-nymph beckons now:
           Yet be thy Spirit sooth’d to bear
           My Requiem through the void of air!

             O Draycot Cliff! again thy height,
           Known beacon of my young delight,
           With sad’ning thoughts, that much portend
           Of change and tumult, I ascend;
           Nor flatter’d by thy levell’d way,
           That smiles, like worldlings, to betray.
           How swells my aged heart, now near
           Scenes to my happiest youth so dear!
           How sinks that heart, as these arise
           Distorted, to my anguish’d eyes!
           Where are those ample plains, display’d
           ’Mong woods with many an opening glade?
           Where is the wild doe bounding by,
           Once emblem of their liberty?
           No stragglers from the warren fleet
           Scud cross my path with flirting feet.
           No jealous blood-hound, brave and proud,
           Throws from the lodge his challenge loud.

             O hear me on thy summits tall,
           Time-honour’d Needwood! hear my call!
           For thou my filial voice hast known.—
           No answer follows—hark! a groan!
           His ancient seats I seek in vain;
           He, nor his ancient seats remain;
           But in strange horror staring round,
           A Spectre, pointing to his wound,
           Of hideous shape, with bald head, stalks
           Before me o’er the ravag’d walks;
           Where Desolation grim affrights[40]
           Sham’d Ceres in unhallow’d rites;
           Where the check’d Plunderer shrinks aside,
           As by his own deed terrified,
           Or fears, from many a faithful root,
           Vengeance in ambush at his foot.

             Wavering alike in mind and pace,
           I roam, familiar haunts to trace;
           The winds, that bow me as I go,
           Rush unrestrain’d, as wild with woe,
           Or querulously vex’d to miss
           The blooming groves they lov’d to kiss.
           Each spot discover’d has its tale;
           Seems a friend’s voice in every gale;
           Wak’d Recollection starts aghast,
           And thoughtful sighs o’er pleasures past.

             When Nature, with exulting smile,
           Form’d from her stores this happy Isle,
           Curious, and bounteously intent
           To raise a central ornament,
           She cull’d the brightest and the best;
           And heap’d them on her darling’s breast:
           Sprung joyful to her warm embrace
           Th’ appointed Genius of the Place;
           His features fair young Beauty drew;
           On her soft lap the fondling grew.
           The Seasons came his birth to greet,
           And pour’d their choicest at his feet;
           The Dryads quaintly curl’d his locks;
           Nymphs, Fauns, and Satyrs rush’d in flocks,
           Pleas’d in such Fairy-land to dwell,
           And peopled every bower and dell.
           Kings mark’d the consecrated ground;
           And Power protective watch’d around.
           Long Mercia sat beside enthron’d;[41]
           And prouder crowns its honours own’d.[42]
           Delighted Ages list’ning heard
           The wild hoof beat the tainted swerd,
           The glad’ning hound and echoing horn,
           And hunters’ shouts far onward born.
           How did his dignity excel!
           Blush, blush ye Times when Needwood fell!

             ’Twas Avarice with his harpy claws,
           Great Victim! rent thy guardian laws;
           Loos’d Uproar with his ruffian bands;[43]
           Bade Havoc show his crimson’d hands;
           Grinn’d a coarse smile, as thy last deer
           Dropp’d in thy lap a dying tear;
           Exulted in his schemes accurst,
           When thy pierc’d heart, abandon’d, burst;
           And, glozing on the public good,
           Insidious demon! suck’d thy blood.
           Detested ever be that day,
           Which left thee a defenceless prey!
           May never sun its presence cheer!
           O be it blotted from the year!

             Where now the Forest-freeman’s boast?
           His joys, his hopes, his name are lost.
           Repentant claimants of the soil![44]           }
           Your’s keen remorse and thankless toil;        }
           Strangers and hirelings snatch the spoil.      }
           Too late ye mourn your glory gone;
           Too late the deed yourselves have done.
           Thus, fell Owhyhee’s senseless crew,
           Him, their best friend, their idol, slew;
           Shar’d his torn limbs with savage pride;
           Then griev’d, infatuate! that he died.
           Ah, who but knows and loves the lay,
           Which Seward hung on Cook’s Morai?
           O had I such melodious tear,
           Lamented Needwood, for thy bier!

             Forests of England! ye might claim
           A proud share in her ancient fame.
           Tell your forgetful country, tell,
           When dangers dread her state befell,
           How rush’d your sons in hardy bands,
           Their long bows in their skilful hands;
           How far the foremost and the best,[45]
           On fierce invading foes they press’d;
           With what sure aim their arrows flew,
           Whistling the death song ere they slew.
           You, in your secret labyrinths, spread[46]
           Your dark shields o’er great Alfred’s head,
           True to your charge. The ruthless Dane
           Brandish’d his reeking blade in vain.
           ’Twas your’s to nurse that mighty mind,
           Where every Virtue sat enshrin’d.
           Your hush’d leaves parted, as the beams[47]
           Of glory shot, and fir’d his dreams.
           You fann’d his patriot bosom’s glow;
           You tun’d his harp; you trimm’d his bow.[48]
           He imag’d in your wolves his foes;
           And practis’d Vengeance keener rose.
           Your proud oaks lean’d[49] to court the hand,
           Which England’s conquering navy plann’d.
           Your song-birds[50] taught him to convey
           Mild manners in attractive lay;
           While Liberty, the nymph you love,[51]
           Braided the silken bands he wove.
           On circled lawns, in secret glade,
           You marshall’d thousands to his aid,
           Then gave him from your woods to shine
           A Cæsar and an Antonine.
           There the bright wreaths of Victory grew;
           And Themis pluck’d her wand from you.
           Rouz’d vigorous by the morning air,
           So quits the monarch stag his lair;[52]
           With fresh fray’d beams his rival seeks;[53]
           His meditated vengeance wreaks;
           And, stamping on the mountain’s brow,
           Claims homage from the vale below.

             On yonder castled cliff of old,[54]
           Needwood, how throng’d thy archers bold,
           When there, for deeds of arms array’d,
           His banner princely Gaunt display’d!
           And fill’d they not his chosen ranks[55]
           On distant Ebro’s oliv’d banks?
           Spain’s boasted slingers! soon ye fled[56]
           From English bowmen, Forest-bred.
           Fame stak’d her dearest honours there:
           And won not Needwood’s sons their share?

             Illustrious History, bear me back
           Up golden Time’s recorded track,
           And bring from thy illumin’d page
           The heroes of that martial age,
           When knightly valour’s own right hand
           Sought fame, and spoil, and high command!
           Say, as they pass in bright review,
           What favourite takes precedence due!
           They come—the pride and pomp of war
           Mark their disastrous course afar.
           Ah, while the mad’ning trumpet brays,
           Fields reek with blood and cities blaze;
           Fell cries for glory or a crown
           The skrieks of wives and orphans drown.
           See English Richard’s crest advance!—
           Back from the lightning of his lance!
           Hark! nations hail in loud accord[57]
           His lion heart and victor sword.
           Cease, cease thy boasting, clarion vain!
           Truth gives my lyre a purer strain.
           Blush, as thy people, haughty king,
           Shout for the man thy Minstrels bring,[58]
           And offer, with less guilty claim,
           A Forest Yeoman’s humble name!
           How sweetly pours that bugle shrill
           It’s mellow tones o’er dale and hill,
           As Sherwood’s Hero, down the glade,[59]
           Steps with his bow and bright brown blade,[60]
           His feather’d arrows, broad and keen,
           Hung lightly o’er his gown of green!
           A robber! say’st thou? Thy harsh laws,
           Oppressor, and the poor man’s cause
           Led him, indignant, to the wood,
           With bold pretence of rights withstood.
           Churls, with no feeling but for self,
           Yield to his better hands your pelf!
           Such trespass Fear disdains to hide;
           And hoodwink’d Justice peeps aside.
           The liberal air his freeborn soul
           Lifts high, in scorn of base controul.
           In fellowship and fealty bound,
           Firm as the knights of Table Round,
           Him and his hundred, tall and fleet,
           Not twice two hundred care to meet.
           Minions, oppose not his career!
           He seeks no slaughter, but of deer.
           Yet will he pass unquestion’d by:
           Raise but your weapons and ye die!
           Start not fair maids! your path pursue
           Unharm’d; he guards its peace for you;
           And cheers, on each occasion kind,
           In age or want, the hamlet hind.
           Here, warriors, to the Forest turn,
           True courage and its use to learn!
           Here, nobles, to the wood resort,
           For courtesy unknown at court!—
           Needwood, this brave man was thy guest;[61]
           Love crown’d the day, and Mirth the feast.

             Region, where all delights were found,
           How look’st thou now? a burial ground!
           With sad memorials, here and there,
           Of what was noble, free, and fair.
           King’s-standing, with a tortur’d frown,[62]
           Marks its own splendour overthrown.
           Whate’er of wood or lawn could please,
           Whate’er of hills that rang’d with ease,
           In grand assemblage broad display’d,
           This far commanding mount survey’d.
           How chang’d! those oaks, that tower’d so high,
           Dismember’d, stript, extended, lie;
           On the stain’d turf their wrecks are pil’d,[63]
           Where thousand Summers bask’d and smil’d;
           In smouldering heaps their limbs consume;[64]
           The dark smoke marks their casual tomb;
           From blacken’d brakes,[65] the choak’d winds toss
           The ashes of the golden goss;
           While great with power, yon Wretch[66] derides
           And boasts the mischief, which he guides.
           Thus, when, in unsuspecting peace,
           Rush’d Scythia’s hordes on fertile Greece,
           Mars, their grim god, whom heaven abhors,
           Urg’d with fell taunts to wasteful wars.
             Valley! where Marebrook, all unveil’d,[67]
           Her slender line, far shining, trail’d,
           With frequent curves thy slopes between,
           As loth to quit the enticing scene;
           Or turning with young fawns to play,
           Wily and volatile as they;
           Alluring, with her tinkling sweet,
           From bank to bank their timid feet;
           Lov’d Valley! now no charm invites
           My steps to rove these injur’d heights;
           Thy wavy knolls the fence arrests;
           The rude spade wounds thy swelling breasts;
           Rent her fair locks and mantle rich,
           Forlorn along that hateful ditch
           Thy violated Naiad steals,
           And in foul streams her shame conceals.

             These broad roots bore a secret grove,
           Where I was wont at eve to rove;
           And, while low-thoughted cares retired,
           Wrapp’d in fond musings, Fancy-fir’d,
           Saw what alone the mind’s eye sees;
           Heard other whisperings than the breeze;
           And knights and dames, and dwarfs portray’d,[68]
           And bright arms gleaming down the glade;
           Drew Magic, muttering powerful spell;
           And Witchcraft with demoniac yell.
           Hark! the last trunk that axe assails;
           See! the plough tears the writhing vales;
           Stop, thoughtless clown! nor dare to bring
           Destruction on that Fairy-Ring,
           Imprinted deep with stainless green,
           And lasting beauty, seldom seen.
           E’en Winter paus’d that turf to spare;
           Nor look’d the fiery Dog-star there.
           And once more may Titania come,
           With farewell, to her ancient home;
           But, for the bee bird’s gaudy plume,[69]
           Wav’d o’er her neck in quivering bloom,
           Funereal spray of dismal hue,
           Of cypress, or the baleful yew,
           Join’d with the nightshade’s deadly flow’r,
           Shall darkly o’er her forehead low’r.
           Attendant Fays, in mournful throng,
           Nor trace the dance, nor raise the song;
           While, for the shrill reed’s cheerful sound,
           That led them lightly tripping round,
           Beetles and drones, with hummings low,
           Measure their footfalls sad and slow.—
           Alas, no gentle sprite remains!
           But foul fiends scour th’ affrighted plains,
           Rob of their honours hills and lawns,
           Trace the mean ditch that greedy yawns,
           And teach the reptile hedge to crawl;
           Twin pests, confederate, seizing all.

             What old man with his gray dog sits,
           What blind man, by those sandy pits?
           ’Tis Manuel![70]—and he rests him, where
           My fox-earth was his nightly care.—
           Ah, come not now to scenes so drear,
           Gay hunters! scenes ye cannot cheer.
           Ah venture not their threats to brave;
           Nor trample on your Needwood’s grave!—
           ’Tis Manuel! and he knows my voice:
           His tears, tho’ not his eyes, rejoice:
           Reduc’d by age and loss of sight
           To beggary and the parish mite,
           That dog his only guide, he picks,
           Groping in fear, those wretched sticks.
           But soon will such small gleanings end.—
           Thou, Needwood, wast the poor man’s friend!

             Garden of Nature! on whose face
           Contended fragrance, bloom, and grace;
           Kind nurse of her abundant good
           To human wants, from herb or wood,
           Tho’ seem the withering winds less rude
           Than thoughtless man’s ingratitude;
           Not all thy children droop forlorn,
           Hurl’d from magnificence to scorn.
           You, fox-gloves, through the varying year[71]
           Fresh, vigorous and countless here,
           You, happy fox-gloves, as you fell,
           In triumph clos’d each purple bell;
           Proud that the bark of fam’d Peru
           Was rival’d, British plant, by you.
           Philosophy and Science rare
           Had pitied Dropsy’s sad despair,
           And pour’d your healing treasure forth;
           While their own Bard extoll’d your worth;
           Poet and Sage: hence doubly shine
           Your honours on Hygiea’s shrine,
           Where pleas’d Apollo stoop’d to yield
           To Darwin’s hand his lyre and shield.[72]

             Again, to save this fair domain,[73]
           A Vernon strove, but strove in vain;
           And many a noble heart was warm[74]
           The fell devourer’s rage to charm;
           But mean Self-interest lit the flame,
           Blind Furies fann’d; and Ruin came.

             Yet Limbrook prattles, in her pride,[75]
           Of ancient scenery on her side,
           Calls, where her beauties still prevail,
           To Byrkley Bowers and Yoxall Dale,
           Boasts of deep shades and allies green,
           And bids me mark that Forest mien,
           Pleas’d, in this circlet, to secure
           Her injur’d parents’ miniature;
           And fain would cheer me, as she leads
           By cultur’d banks to verdant meads;
           And spreads her mirrors to reflect
           How Nature’s hand-maid, Art, hath deck’d
           The matron here, with choicest bloom;—
           Ah, garlands now for Needwood’s tomb!

             Limbrook! protected child and heir,
           Enjoy thy patrimony fair;
           And ever, in thy favour’d bound,[76]
           Prosperity and Peace be found.
           Yet long wilt thou lament the change
           Of herds and flocks, that near thee range,
           More loudly to thy rushes chide,
           Since comes no doe her fawn to hide;
           And long thy murmuring stream will shrink,
           When stoops the stranger ewe to drink;[77]
           And long those oaks, Destruction spar’d,
           Grieve for the greatness, once they shar’d,
           And sigh, while, ages hence, appear
           The tracks of their remember’d deer,[78]
           And scatter, careless, to the wind,
           Fruits, for their Autumn feast design’d.

             Thus, when that monster of the world[79]
           Thy nobles from their honours hurl’d,
           Oh France! a few, to fate resign’d,
           All lost, but dignity of mind,
           Still on the general wreck abide,
           Terror and Tyranny beside,
           And privileg’d in fall’n estate,
           Walk humbly with the power they hate,
           Regretful of their happier times,
           And sighing o’er a nation’s crimes.

             Yet Byrkley Bowers, your Emma’s art[80]
           Such sweet delusion can impart,
           Such truth her curious pencil gives,
           That Needwood in its magic lives.
           O, haste to catch, ingenious maid,
           His remnant beauties ere they fade:
           So to th’ admiring world be shown
           Fair forms, accomplish’d like your own!

             Though aptly might these dells retain
           Wild Fancy and her sylvan train,
           I ask no fabled nymph to lend
           Her idle aid, as I descend;
           I seek not such attendants here;
           But hail your presence and revere,
           Truth, Genius, Science!—Yoxall Dale,
           ’Mong Forest Walks distinguish’d, hail!
           Enough, that future times will say:
           “Here Gisborne penn’d his moral lay,[81]
           “Practis’d the duties he enjoin’d,
           “Led and instructed human kind,
           “Here the high paths of Nature trod,
           “And saw and glorified her God.”

             Gigantic hollies![82] many a year
           Your lopp’d limbs fed the pining deer;
           And many a year, your growth renew’d,
           In venerable solitude,
           With arch and column, here you stood,
           As once the Temple of the Wood.
           The seasons wrought not on your form;
           You bent not to the battering storm;
           Arrested on each shrouded brow,
           No wanton sunbeams pry’d below.—
           Respected veterans! favourite glade!
           Oft, as I pac’d your pensive shade,
           Rapt Meditation mus’d in prayer;
           Or self-indulgence soften’d care.—
           These, Needwood, thy destroyers saw
           And seiz’d, uncheck’d by shame or awe!

             Fair Virgin! in that hallow’d gloom,[83]
           While the bell knoll’d thee to thy tomb,
           I chose a polish’d trunk to mark
           Thy memory on its yielding bark:
           As held in reverence profound,
           The grove was motionless around,
           Save that an ivy’s stragling leaf
           Shook in the breathings of my grief;
           Watch’d Pity through her starting tears,
           Numbering too soon thy transient years;
           Lorn Loves, that knew thee well, were by;
           And Sorrow with reverted eye.
           Yes; “thou wast all that youth admires,
           A parent seeks, or friend desires!”

             Ah, if yet spar’d, to that lone shrine
           Direct me, some remaining sign!
           Or whispering airs instruct to find,
           Soft as ye kiss the swelling rind!
           Or gentle red-breast hop before!—
           No; those retirements are no more.—
           See the griev’d wood-dove on her flight!
           And the scar’d owlet lost in light!

             Hark! the same bell!—take, sister bier,[84]
           Affection’s sigh and friendship’s tear!
           These for ourselves:—for thee, blest shade!
           Amply thy debt of life was paid;
           And gentle, as that life, thy fall;—
           Rest honour’d, as belov’d by all!
           Rest, while the parting Virtues bear
           For heaven’s approof, thy record fair!
           In yonder cloud that lowers above,
           Darkening the cheerful face of Dove,
           Their white plumes glimmer to the eye,
           And radiant arms extend on high.

             Yes, Holly-Bush![85]—endeared spot!
           Forsaken long, but ne’er forgot!
           Yes, Holly-Bush! through all disguise
           I know thee, but with watery eyes!
           With thee what warm emotions start!
           What passions press upon my heart!
           Quick rushes my own change to view;
           And wounds, yet tender, bleed anew.
           I come not now to treasur’d sweets;
           Blank my approach; no welcome greets;
           No lifted sash, no smiling face
           Salutes me, joyous from the chase;
           No ready grooms my call await;
           Leaps on its hinge no friendly gate;
           Not for my meal that kitchen’s blaze;
           Thy people on a stranger gaze;
           And, for the fox-hound cow’ring bland,
           Bays the fierce house-dog at his stand.
           Yet, as my doubtful step withdraws,
           Fresh memories plead for longer pause;
           While mixes with each faint farewell
           What only struggling sighs can tell.

             Yes, Holly-Bush!—here fled too fast
           Fair hours, most valued now they’re past.
           But not, in my regard, import
           These structures of a prouder sort;
           And former fondness ill can brook
           This order’d dress and inland look;[86]
           Thy flowery copse and bowers make room
           For alien shrubs and new perfume;
           Thy meek rill swells with glaring brim;
           Thy rude paths march through gardens trim;
           Ah, here no unambitious brow,[87]
           Nor my contented dwelling now!

             But thou remainest, favourite Tree!
           Extend thy friendly canopy!
           Ah! know me, sooth me, in my age,
           And cheer this mournful pilgrimage!

             Hall! whose kind arm is stretch’d between[88]
           The spoiler and yon Forest scene,
           Its green vale with its wooded banks,
           (And Needwood’s honour owes thee thanks)
           Save too this suppliant at thy door,
           O save my spreading Sycamore!
           It gave my window breezes sweet,
           And shelter when the tempest beat;
           When wild bees humm’d its boughs among,
           Or cooing stock-dove watch’d her young,
           Oft have I sat beneath its shade,
           And bless’d my children, as they play’d.
           Ah! let not Taste, with upstart pride,
           This old domestic thrust aside;
           This relic, generous owner! spare
           To Needwood’s earliest poet’s prayer:
           So prosper here thy fair designs;
           So Beauty lend thee her own lines;
           So here all social Pleasures throng;
           And sweet Enjoyment flourish long.

             Revered Swilcar![89] kingly Oak!
           Ill spar’d from thee th’ assassin’s stroke.
           How brilliant was thy sylvan court!
           Of sons and subjects proud resort;
           Here stately rang’d in close array;
           There lightly group’d on carpets gay;
           Attendant hollies glow’d beneath,
           All arm’d; their crest a woodbine wreath.
           In safety skipp’d the dappled herds;
           Securely perch’d the choiring birds;
           O’er charter’d ground thy broad shade spread;
           In freedom wav’d thy sacred head,
           Where age had whiten’d many a stem,
           And plac’d an antler’d diadem.

             Horrid!—I see thee far[90]—defac’d—
           In fetters on a dreary waste,
           With outstretch’d arms and bosom bare,
           Appealing to the troubled air;
           Yet taxing not the pelting storm;
           But those, more cruel, who deform
           Thy rich retreats, thy turf defile
           With fence, and road, and uses vile;
           Nor of the whole, which Nature gave,
           Leave thee enough to make thy grave,
           When comes, as come it must, thy fall,
           _Lear_ of the Forest, robb’d of all!

             Enough; and from my trembling hand
           Drops the sad lyre.—Abused Land,
           Take my last strains! in happier days
           I tun’d my rude horn to thy praise;
           And (all I wish’d) the friends I lov’d
           Those unassuming notes approv’d;
           And some, with strength beyond its own,[91]
           In sweeter echoes cheer’d the tone;
           To swell _this_ tear, which sorrow drew,
           Do _they_ remain?—alas how few!

             Swilcar! from thee a wither’d bough
           Will best become my temples now.
           And pendent here my shell I leave
           Mournfully mute; save when, at eve,
           While Silence lists on brooding wings,
           Soft airs shall brush the murmuring strings:
           So still be fond complaint preferr’d,
           Its master’s voice no longer heard!

             Then haply some, who wander near
           Musing, may lend a partial ear;
           And if thy venerable age,
           And awful size their hearts engage,
           If Nature’s wood-wild walks they love,
           If violated grandeur move,
           Ah, will not indignation rise,
           As Fancy views with weeping eyes,
           Nymphs, Satyrs, Fauns, in cheerless row,
           And Dian with a broken bow;
           Hears Druid’s groan and Dryad’s shriek
           Oft through the moonlight stillness break,
           Yon prison’d cliffs[92] their griefs repeat,
           Dove howling hoarsely at their feet?

             Region!—I lov’d thee at my heart—
           Farewell!—for ever now we part.
           Forest farewell!—delighted Time
           Thee would have spar’d in endless prime;
           Me, as he shakes my ebbing sands,
           While MORTAL LIFE her roll expands,
           Me, feebly bending o’er thy tomb,
           He beckons to her COMMON HOME.—
           Ah, human weakness! may a name,
           Aspiring to no splendid fame,
           Live, yet a little, in my SONGS
           Of NEEDWOOD’S PRAISE and NEEDWOOD’S WRONGS!




                      MY GRAND CLIMACTERIC. 1802.


       As one, who journeys over unknown lands,
       Ere yet the sun withdraws his western ray,
       Stops on some mountain’s brow, whose site commands
       The shifting scenes and labyrinths of the way;

       With fond reverted look his thoughts retrace,
       Where flowers their sweets, and wild-birds gave their song,
       And dwell, long dwell! on many a favourite space,
       Where prodigal of time he loiter’d long;

       Lovers and friends in bright perspective rise,
       Companions of his morn, on yon blue hill;
       Down that blank plain he drops a look, and sighs,
       Whence seem their parting words to reach him still;

       Here his pain’d eyes unkindly districts mark,
       Where faint heats smote him or fierce storms o’ertook;
       There strain o’er deep’ning woods at noonday dark,
       Where his false steps their destin’d course forsook;

       Pond’ring the change and chances of the day,
       As warning eve prepares her veil to close,
       Serious, he now proceeds with short survey,
     Expecting night’s dark hour, and hoping calm repose:

       So I look back on more than sixty years,
       In life’s sequester’d walks obscurely spent,
       Where tho’ its trophied head no column rears,
       Inscrib’d with mighty deed, or proud event,

       Yet, on some few small eminencies, glow
       The heart’s rejoicing-lights of self-applause;
       Some generous claims surmount the gloom below,
       And shame and sharp regrets a moment pause;

       Yet these prevail—ah! might my wish prevail
       That Time would turn my near exhausted glass;
       Then not a grain should of its harvest fail;—
       Seeds are but sands when unimprov’d they pass.

       Vain wish! vain promise! what dost thou presume,
       O weak Humanity? thyself but dust!
       Since from the cradle, hourly, to the tomb,
       Toil, trifle, err and grieve, frail thing! thou must.

       But pleasures, passions lose their dangerous force;
       And the world’s business shrinks as age descends:
       O spare Adversity! my evening course;
     My little part is play’d, my small importance ends.




                       _To F. N. C. MUNDY, Esq._
                              ON HIS POEM
                         THE FALL OF NEEDWOOD.


           Poet of Needwood, much my heart approves
         This thy ow’d duty to his ravag’d groves,
         The lost! the lovely! who in better days
         View’d their each grace reflected in thy lays;
         And O! when many a future Age has pass’d,
         Rolling oblivious o’er his nameless Waste,
         Its sometime beauties shall again revive,
         And in thy pictur’d strains for EVER live.

           Come, pensive listening, ye once jocund Throng,
         Whilome that rov’d those forest-haunts along;
         Explor’d, with pleasure brightening in your air,
         Each coy, green labyrinth and each turfy lair,
         Still, as in pride of youth, the wanton Spring
         Expanded to the Sun her showery wing,
         And cliffs, illustrious in their golden bloom,
         Rose o’er the glades of light-besprinkled gloom.

           Nor absent ye when Summer’s fervid Hours
         Dropt more luxuriant curtains on the Bowers,
         And the vast Oak’s writh’d arms of dusky green
         Shadow’d the dappled Tenants of the Scene,
         With rival Elm, whose mossy trunk appears
         Out-numbering far the lonely Eagle’s years.

           Nor when the Months consummate, left their vales
         To Suns less ardent, less benignant gales,
         And Autumn painted, with his tawny hand,
         The shrinking foliage, and in colours bland
         Streak’d the pale red with purple, faint and brief,
         And tipt with tarnish’d gold each trembling leaf.

           Nor e’en when Phœbus’ Steeds, no longer fleet,
         With mane dishevel’d streaming to their feet,
         Struggling thro’ clouds, th’ hybernal Solstice gain,
         Their necks bedropt with globes of freezing rain,
         And the loud Tyrant of the dying Year
         Stript OTHER Groves, made OTHER Forests fear;
         For Needwood to his sway disdain’d to yield;
         His polish’d umbrage an unfailing shield,
         Those numerous hollies on his breast and brow,
         That thrust their scarlet clusters thro’ the snow,
         Or spread their glossy leaves to transient rays
         The rebel Glory of the icy days.

           Nor if, ere yet arisen, dim Morning heard
         Your lightheel’d Coursers paw the dewy swerd,
         When the sly Prowler stole adown the wind,
         And hop’d he left no tell-tale scent behind.
         Vain hope! your swift staunch hounds the search began,
         To right and left their hurrying numbers ran,
         Till found the taint, in streaming files they hie,
         And in one shrill, continuous, clamouring cry,
         To which th’ accordant Forest joyous rings,
         Hang on his rear, while o’er the vale he springs,
         Dash through the rhimy glades, and round the hills
         As when receiving tribute brooks and rills
         O’er flinty bed a River foams and roars,
         Loud and impatient of meandering shores;
         Or, deepen’d, shews the Sun his mirror’d face,
         Or zones with silver light the mountain’s base.

           Now come, with Mundy, where the Ruin lowers!
         He hymns the dirge of the devasted Bowers.
         Echo his wailings o’er their fallen state,
         Whom Centuries hail’d irregularly great.
         Come, execrate the Edict that destroy’d,
         Leaving Time-hallow’d Needwood bare and void!
         There fell Imagination’s rural fane!
         Thence fled fair-shafted Dian’s votive Train,
         All which the Bard, entranc’d, in forest sees,
         Satyrs and Fauns and leaf-crown’d Dryades.
         They fled when Avarice, with rapacious frown,
         From Mercia’s temples struck her sylvan crown.

           Yet, gentle Minstrel, they whose raptur’d ears
         Drank thy sweet Song in the departed years;
         Saw oaken wreaths thy auburn brows entwine,
         The well-won meed at Needwood’s shadowy shrine,
         Shall find thy Gratulation’s vivid glow
         Match’d by thy Requiem in its mournful flow;
         The orb of Mundy’s Muse-illumin’d day
         Setting with rival tho’ with milder ray;
         Pleas’d shall compare the evening with the noon,
         And feel, in equal power, the Cypress Garland won.

                                         ANNA SEWARD.[93]




                               IMPROMPTU.
                TO THE AUTHOR OF THE NEW POEM, ENTITLED
                         THE FALL OF NEEDWOOD.

                                                          OCTOBER, 1808.


                When Poesy, the Child of Zeal,
              Who soothes each Pang, that Earth can feel,
              Beheld, at wounded Nature’s call,
              That Scene of Horror, Needwood’s Fall!
              She said, in haste to yield Relief,
              And calm the Mighty Mother’s Grief:
                “Nature! dear Parent! Power divine!
              Whose Joys and Griefs are truly mine!
              To you my sympathy devotes
              My chearful, and my plaintive Notes:
              With Feelings not to be supprest,
              I view your lacerated Breast;
              This Waste of Ravages! where stood
              Your Sylvan Wealth! your graceful Wood!
              I cannot from the rifled Earth
              Call into sudden, second Birth
              The Forest, vanished from your sight,
              Tho’ once your Pride! and my Delight!
              But I can raise, in your Distress,
              A Charm, that scarce will soothe you less;
              Behold this Proof of my Regard,
              In Needwood’s fascinating Bard!

                He, whom our blended Gifts engage
              To sing, with youthful Fire, in age,
              He, Needwood! by whose Breath you live,
              Gives you, whatever Verse can give;
              He makes immortal, in his Songs,
              Your Beauties all, and all your Wrongs:
              His Verse displays a deathless Charm,
              That foils the Force of Havoc’s Arm;
              Age after Age, while Nymphs are found
              To breathe Delight on English Ground,
              The grateful Dryads will admire
              The Magic of their Mundy’s Lyre;
              And boast the Wood, he lov’d to praise,
              For ever verdant in his Lays.

                                              W. HAYLEY.

-----

Footnote 1:

  [DOVE, _etc._] The river _Dove_.

Footnote 2:

  [_And bids his hollies, etc._] The numerous groves and clumps of
  hollies give uncommon beauty to the winter-scenes of _Needwood
  Forest_.

Footnote 3:

  [EMES, _etc._] Mr. EMES, who ornamented _Beaudesart_, the seat of Ld.
  PAGET, which is seen from the Forest, and who has obtained great
  reputation for his Taste in ornamental Gardening, has frequently
  assured the Author, that he took his best hints from the scenes of
  _Needwood_.

Footnote 4:

  [_Maim’d the staunch hound, etc._] Alludes to the Order for _Lawing_,
  or cutting off a claw of all Dogs kept within the purlieus of the
  royal forests, to prevent their destroying the Deer.

Footnote 5:

  [_Here with fair peace, etc._] The Author rents his house, upon the
  verge of the forest, of Sir WM. BAGOT. It was built and inhabited by
  two gentlemen of the BAGOT family.

Footnote 6:

  [_And_ ARDEN _boasts, etc._] See SHAKESPEAR’S _As you like it_.—Scene
  Forest of Arden.

Footnote 7:

  [_The wandering Wood, etc._] Fairy Queen, Book 1st. chap. 1st. stanza
  13th. _This is the wandering Wood, this Errors den._

Footnote 8:

  [_And bears away, etc._] B. 1st. c. 2d. The Shield inscribed _Sans
  Foy_.

Footnote 9:

  [_A gaudy bee-bird’s, etc._] The Humming Bird.

Footnote 10:

  [_And there in gothic arches, etc._] Dr. Warburton observes the gothic
  architecture originally imitated the groves, which were in earlier
  times consecrated to religious worship.

                                                        DIVINE LEGATION.

Footnote 11:

  [_One like a sexton, etc._] Earth-stopper.

Footnote 12:

  [_Where this gay mount, etc._] A beautiful eminence called
  KING’S-STANDING.

Footnote 13:

  [_And_ LICHFIELD’S _bower, etc._] LICHFIELD Bower is supposed to be
  the tumulus of three Saxon Kings slain in battle near that spot.

Footnote 14:

  [_British Nile, etc._] Dr. PLOTT calls the DOVE the Nile of England,
  and attributes the fertility of its floods to the sheep dung washed
  from the hills in the Moorlands.

Footnote 15:

  [BROWN, _etc._] HAWKINS BROWN Esq; of _Foston upon Dove_.

Footnote 16:

  [C’ANDISH, _etc._] _Doveridge_, the seat of C’ANDISH, ESQ;

Footnote 17:

  [FITZHERBERT, _etc._] RICHARD FITZHERBERT, ESQ; of _Sommershall_.

Footnote 18:

  [_The social flag, etc._] Messrs. ADDERLEY and SCOTT have pitched a
  tent upon a fine hill above _Coton_, from whence a flag flies when
  they are at home, as a signal to their friends.

Footnote 19:

  [_Outlaw, etc._] A Deer-stealer refusing to surrender was here slain
  by a Keeper.

Footnote 20:

  [_Where life a gentler breast, etc._] This unfortunate young man being
  sent on an errand by the Author of this Poem, died on his return; was
  found next morning in the forest within a mile of his home, his dog
  standing by him. He was a weaver, supported his father and mother; was
  engaged on the night of his death to meet his sweetheart at a
  Christmas feast in the neighbourhood.

Footnote 21:

  [_Yon cliff, etc._] TUTBURY CASTLE.

Footnote 22:

  [FERRERS, _etc._] ROBERT DE FERRERS joining a rebellion against HENRY
  3d. forfeited the possession of _Tutbury_.

Footnote 23:

  [_Castle-guard, etc._] A service imposed upon those to whom Castles
  and Estates adjoining were granted.

Footnote 24:

  [MARY, _etc._] MARY Queen of _Scots_ was a prisoner in _Tutbury_
  Castle at the time of the Duke of NORFOLK’s intrigues: she listened to
  his proposals of marriage, as the only means of obtaining her liberty,
  declaring herself otherwise averse to farther matrimonial connections.

Footnote 25:

  [_While minstrels, etc._] The minstrels formerly crowded to _Tutbury_
  Castle, then a place of festivity and hospitality, in such numbers, as
  to require regulations of order and precedence amongst them, the
  person appointed for this purpose was called _King_ of the
  _Minstrels_.

Footnote 26:

  [_In the rude sport, etc._] The annual Bull-running.

Footnote 27:

  [_Yon hill, etc._] HOUND-HILL, the ancient seat of the VERNON’S.

Footnote 28:

  [_Beside me lies, etc._] The situation of NEEDWOOD is high, and its
  banks, descending from the plain of the forest to the country below,
  are in many places a mile deep; they consist of alternate cliffs and
  dingles, and are entirely covered with trees and rough copses.

Footnote 29:

  [_Yes_, EATON-BANKS, _etc._] EATON-WOOD, seen from the Forest, was the
  property of the late GODFRY BAGNELL CLARKE, ESQUIRE.

Footnote 30:

  [HENRY, _etc._] The Hon. HENRY VERNON.

Footnote 31:

  [_On breezy wings, etc._] A Deer when hunted runs against the Wind.

Footnote 32:

  [_No shrite-cock, etc._] The Shrite-cock or Missel Thrush.

Footnote 33:

  [_Destruction’s arm, etc._] By order from the Dutchy Court of
  LANCASTER, to which the forest of NEEDWOOD belongs, the timber is now
  felling under the direction of an officer of that Court.

Footnote 34:

  [_Huge_ SWILCAR, _etc._] SWILCAR Oak stands singly upon a beautiful
  small lawn surrounded with extensive woods,—it is of remarkable size,
  and supposed to be six hundred years old.

Footnote 35:

  [_Accursed_ JULIUS, _etc._] CÆSAR cuts down a consecrated grove.
  LUCAN, lib. 3.

Footnote 36:

  [_In freedom’s dearest days, etc._] The charter of HEN. 3. confirms
  the privilege to Lords of parliament of killing a Deer or two in any
  of the royal forests in their way to or from parliament, in the
  presence of the keeper, or on blowing a horn in his absence.—’tis
  about six hundred years since that king reigned.

Footnote 37:

  [_Yet, yet, fond Hope, etc._] Upon the above order from the Dutchy
  Court, Ld. VERNON proposed an inclosure of some parts of the forest,
  for the preservation of the young timber, and the beauty of the place.

Footnote 38:

  [_Flake of snow, etc._] Flake-white.

Footnote 39:

  [_Lakes, etc._] Carnation Colours.

Footnote 40:

  [_Where Desolation, etc._] The trees in some parts have been so
  injudiciously fallen, that the tillage of the ground is extremely
  difficult, or quite at a stand.

Footnote 41:

  [_Long Mercia sat beside enthron’d_;] The magnificent site of the
  castle at Tutbury, no doubt was occupied by a considerable fort in or
  before the time of the Saxon heptarchy when it was the residence of
  the Kings and Earls of Mercia, who might alternately enjoy hence the
  pleasures of the chase in their adjoining forest of Needwood, or the
  satisfaction of security against an enemy.—Shaw’s _History of
  Staffordshire_.

Footnote 42:

  [_And prouder crowns its honours own’d._] See Needwood Forest, p. 23,
  of King’s-Standing.

Footnote 43:

  [_Loos’d Uproar &c._] The day of disafforesting presented an
  extraordinary scene of riot and disturbance, in consequence of the
  pursuit of the remaining deer by mobs from all parts.

Footnote 44:

  [_Repentant claimants &c._] It is believed that the freeholders now
  very generally regret the Inclosure.

Footnote 45:

  [_How far the foremost and the best_,] Though formerly the yeomanry of
  this kingdom were every where trained to the use of the long-bow, and
  excelled all other nations in the art of shooting, it may be
  reasonably presumed that the best archers were to be found in and near
  the forests.

Footnote 46:

  [_You in your secret labyrinths &c._] Those scenes (forests in
  Somersetshire) will ever be famous in British history, while the
  remembrance continues of Alfred the Great. Frequent inundations of
  Danes and repeated losses had driven him from the management of
  affairs. But he retired before the enemies of his country only to
  attack them with more advantage. Seeing the time ripe for action he
  emerged from his retreat where he had been concealed, but not inactive
  during a twelvemonth; called his friends together in the forest of
  Selwood, which sheltered him and his numbers. Here arranging his
  followers, he burst from the forest like a torrent upon the Danes, and
  totally defeated them.—_Gilpin’s Forest Scenery, Hume, &c._

Footnote 47:

  [_Your hush’d leaves &c._] Alfred on the night of his retirement from
  the Danes, it is said, had a vision of St. Cuthbert, comforting and
  assuring him he should be a great King.—_Camden’s Britannia._

Footnote 48:

  [_You tun’d his harp, you trimm’d his bow._] He was skilful in the use
  of both.

Footnote 49:

  [_Your proud oaks lean’d_] He provided himself with a naval power,
  which though the most natural defence of an island, had hitherto been
  totally neglected by the English.

Footnote 50:

  [_Your song-birds_] He endeavoured to convey his morality to his
  subjects by apologues, parables, stories, and apothegms couch’d in
  poetry.

Footnote 51:

  [_While Liberty &c._] Amidst the necessary rigor of justice this great
  Prince preserved the most sacred regard to the liberty of his people.

Footnote 52:

  [_Lair_] The couch or harbour of a wild beast. _Milton._

Footnote 53:

  [_With fresh fray’d beams &c._] As soon as the new horns (or beams) of
  a stag have acquired their full dimensions and solidity, he rubs them
  against the trees in order to clear them of a skin with which they are
  covered.—_Buffon._ To fray (_frayer_, _Fr._) is the hunting term for
  this operation.

Footnote 54:

  [_On yonder castled cliff &c._] Tutbury castle, the residence of John
  of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster.

Footnote 55:

  [_And fill’d they not &c._] The Duke of Lancaster greatly
  distinguished himself in a battle fought between Najara and Navarete
  near the Ebro in Spain in 1367. He commanded the 1st battalion of the
  English army.—_Johnes’s Froissart._

Footnote 56:

  [_Spain’s boasted slingers &c._] The Spanish commonalty made use of
  slings, to which they were accustomed, & from which they threw large
  stones which at first much annoyed the English: but when their first
  cast was over, and they felt the sharpness of the English arrows, they
  kept no longer any order.—_Johnes’s Froissart._

Footnote 57:

  [_Hark! nations hail &c._] Alluding to his prowess and fame in the
  Crusades.

Footnote 58:

  [_The man thy Minstrels bring_,] As the subject of their historic
  ballads. The minstrels were much encouraged in this King’s reign.

Footnote 59:

  [_As Sherwood’s Hero, &c._] The severity of those tyrannical
  forest-laws that were introduced by our Norman Kings, and the great
  temptation of breaking them by such as lived near the royal forests,
  must constantly have occasioned great numbers of outlaws, and
  especially of such as were the best marksmen. These naturally fled to
  the woods for shelter, and forming into troops endeavoured by their
  numbers to protect themselves from the dreadful penalties of their
  delinquency. This will easily account for the troops of banditti,
  which formerly lurked in the Royal forests, and from their superior
  skill in archery and knowledge of the recesses of those unfrequented
  solitudes, found it no difficult matter to resist or elude the civil
  power. Among those, none was ever more famous than Robin Hood, the
  Hero of Sherwood forest; of whom Stow’s account is briefly thus.—“In
  this time (about the year 1190, in the reign of Richard 1st) were many
  robbers and outlaws, among the which Robin Hood and Little John,
  renowned thieves, continued in woods despoyling and robbing the goods
  of the rich. They killed none but such as would invade them, or by
  resistance for their own defence. The saide Robert entertained an
  hundred tall men and good archers with such spoiles and thefts as he
  got, upon whom four hundred (were they ever so strong) durst not give
  the onset. He suffered no woman to be oppressed, violated, or
  otherwise molested: poor mens goods he spared abundantlie, relieving
  them with that, which by theft he got from Abbeys and the houses of
  rich Carles.” The personal courage of this celebrated outlaw, his
  skill in archery, his humanity, and especially his levelling principle
  of taking from the rich and giving to the poor, have in all ages
  rendered him the favourite of the common people. He was in early times
  the favourite subject of popular songs.—_Percy’s Reliques of antient
  English Poetry, 1st vol._

Footnote 60:

  [_Bright brown blade, broad arrows, gown of green_,] is the language
  of the ballads.

Footnote 61:

  [_Needwood, this brave man &c._] See in Robin Hood’s garland a ballad,
  (quoted in Shaw’s History of Staffordshire) giving an account of Robin
  Hood’s visit to Tutbury; and of his marriage there with
  Clorinda.________ The relation of the forest to Tutbury will probably
  admit of this consideration of them as one and the same.

Footnote 62:

  [_King’s-standing, &c._] See Needwood Forest, page 23.

Footnote 63:

  [_On the stain’d turf their wrecks are pil’d_,] Bark-ranges.

Footnote 64:

  [_In smouldering heaps, &c._] Making charcoal.

Footnote 65:

  [_From blacken’d brakes_,] Burning the furze-brakes.—Goss.—_Bailey’s
  Dictionary._

Footnote 66:

  [_Yon Wretch_] Surveyor or overlooker.

Footnote 67:

  [_Valley! where Marebrook, all unveil’d_,] This Valley nearly bisected
  the Forest in beautifully varied windings, though without trees of any
  kind on its sides, or on the verge of its little stream, Marebrook,
  the course of which was remarkably flexuous; but is now actually
  turned down the straight fence-ditch.

Footnote 68:

  [_And knights and dames, and dwarfs portray’d, &c._] Needwood Forest,
  p. 16.

Footnote 69:

  [_But for the bee bird’s gaudy plume, &c._] See Needwood Forest, p.
  16.

Footnote 70:

  [_Manuel._] The Forest earth-stopper in the hunting days of the
  author.

Footnote 71:

  [_You fox-gloves, &c._] _See_ _Digitalis—Loves of the plants, p. 78._

  “The effect of this plant (the fresh leaves of which may be had at all
  seasons of the year) in that kind of Dropsy which is termed anasarca
  is truly astonishing.”

Footnote 72:

  [_Lyre and shield._] As the God of Medicine, giving health and safety,
  Apollo is sometimes described with a shield, as well as a lyre.

Footnote 73:

  [_Again to save &c._] See Needwood Forest, p. 43.

Footnote 74:

  [_And many a noble heart &c._] Alluding to the opposition to the
  Inclosure.

Footnote 75:

  [_Yet Limbrook, &c._] This rivulet rises on the late Forest and takes
  its course through an extensive valley on the brow of which stands
  Byrkley Lodge, and proceeds downwards by Yoxall Lodge: some beautiful
  Forest scenes have been added to the old Inclosures of these Lodges,
  where are shrubberies and sheets of water.

Footnote 76:

  [_And ever, in thy favour’d bound_,] Applying the whole scenery around
  these lodges to Limbrook.

Footnote 77:

  [_When stoops the stranger ewe to drink_;] Sheep were not depastur’d
  on the Forest.

Footnote 78:

  [_The tracks of their remember’d deer_,] It is said that the
  Wolf-tracks may yet be seen in some parts which those animals
  frequented, in Ireland, centuries ago.

Footnote 79:

  [_Monster of the world_] French Revolution.

Footnote 80:

  [_Emma’s art_] Miss Emma Sneyd, of Byrkley Lodge, has produced some
  beautiful landscapes and drawings of the Forest scenes.

Footnote 81:

  [“_Here Gisborne penn’d his moral lay_] The character and writings
  both in verse and prose of the Rev. Thomas Gisborne, of Yoxall Lodge,
  are equally well known and admired: the public has lately called for a
  seventh edition of his “Walks in a Forest.”

Footnote 82:

  [_Gigantic hollies!_] Particular groups of hollies of great age and
  size are here alluded to, as in _Needwood Forest p. 19_. Having been
  lopped for the deer in winter, (the upper part of their remaining
  trunks and branches being again cloathed with their fresh ever-green
  shoots) they had somewhat the appearance of ruins.

Footnote 83:

  [_Fair Virgin!_] The Hon. Catharine Venables Vernon died in the summer
  of 1775.

Footnote 84:

  [_Hark the same bell!—take, sister bier_,] The Hon. Martha Venables
  Vernon died while the Author was writing this poem.

Footnote 85:

  [_Yes, Holly-Bush!_] Formerly the residence of the Author, where many
  alterations have since been made and are making.

Footnote 86:

  [_Inland look_;] In contradistinction to its former forest character,
  in which sense this word is repeatedly used by Shakespear in “As you
  like it,” though there applied to persons.

Footnote 87:

  [_Unambitious brow &c._] Needwood Forest p. 8.——[_Favourite Tree
  Sycamore_;] Needwood Forest p. 10.

Footnote 88:

  [_Hall, whose kind arm &c._] T. K. Hall, Esq. has purchased Holly Bush
  with a considerable portion of the adjacent Forest land, the scenery
  of which he intends to preserve.

Footnote 89:

  [_Revered Swilcar_;] Needwood Forest p. 41, 42. &c.

Footnote 90:

  [_Horrid!—I see thee far!_] The present appearance of Swilcar oak over
  a broad and hitherto uncultivated part of the late Forest, where not
  another tree remains, is very striking. He is fenced off from a new
  road.

Footnote 91:

  [_And some, with strength &c._] Alluding to the complimentary verses
  printed with Needwood Forest, and others afterwards sent to the
  author.

Footnote 92:

  [_Yon prison’d cliffs_] The banks and cliffs of the Forest, hanging
  towards the river Dove, are now fenced in, though otherwise left in
  their former state.

Footnote 93:

  Milton, in Comus, makes Naiades the plural of Naiad, “amid the
  flowery-kirtled Naiades.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed blackletter font in =equals=.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEEDWOOD FOREST ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


