The Project Gutenberg eBook of Behind the prison bars
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Behind the prison bars
        A reminder of our duties toward those who have been so unfortunate as to be cast into prison

Author: E. E. Byrum

Release date: February 19, 2025 [eBook #75420]

Language: English

Original publication: Moundsville, WV: Gospel Trumpet Publishing Co, 1901

Credits: Bob Taylor, and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEHIND THE PRISON BARS ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




  BEHIND
  THE PRISON BARS.

  _A REMINDER OF OUR DUTIES
  TOWARD THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN SO UNFORTUNATE
  AS TO BE CAST INTO PRISON._

  By E. E. BYRUM,

  Author of “The Secret of Salvation,” “Divine Healing of Soul
  and Body,” “The Great Physician,” “The
  Boy’s Companion,” Etc.

  “_Remember them that are in bonds,
  as bound with them._”—_Heb. 13:3._

  GOSPEL TRUMPET PUBLISHING CO.,

  MOUNDSVILLE, W. VA.

  1901.




  COPYRIGHT, 1901,
  BY
  E. E. BYRUM.




AUTHOR’S PREFACE.


Help a man who is in trouble and manifest a care for his soul, even
though he is an enemy; it touches a tender chord of his hardened heart,
tends to loose the binding powers of sin, causing him to look up with
hope. Realizing the great neglect of duty toward them who are behind
the prison-bars, unable to help themselves in many respects, inspired
the writing of this volume. It was not the intention of the author
to write a thorough work on this subject, but to call attention to a
few facts concerning the prisons and jails, also the treatment and
privileges of the inmates, and thus awaken the people to a sense of
duty and the manifestation of a feeling of sympathy. The majority of
people have never visited a jail or state prison, consequently know but
little about them, and feel little, if any, responsibility on that line.

About two years ago the Gospel Trumpet Publishing Company of
Moundsville, W. Va., established a fund for sending out literature
free to the poor, to jails, prisons, and wherever most needed. As much
as ten thousand dollars’ worth of books, tracts, and papers have in
this way been sent out during one year to various parts of the United
States, Canada, Europe, and other foreign countries. Yet it seems only
a drop in the bucket, as it were, in consideration of what should be
done. It is our earnest prayer that the readers of this little volume
will at once put forth the greatest possible effort to properly supply
the prisoners and thus aid in bringing about a reformation in their
lives.

In order to show the result of some of the efforts put forth to supply
the prisoners with good literature and their appreciation of the same,
quite a number of letters from prisoners and prison officials have been
inserted. While these letters have quite a similarity, yet it is hoped
that their sameness will not destroy their interest in consideration
of the fact that thereby the prisoners from a broad scope of territory
have the privilege of giving expression to their feeling of gratitude
toward those who have thus manifested their friendship.

The names have been omitted of those who have written letters and
testimonies; however, they appear in full in the original manuscript
and are genuine. Only the serial numbers are given to those whose
biographies appear in the book. We are grateful for the kind assistance
of prison officials and prisoners who have kindly contributed. Further
communications, or letters, from prisoners or any one interested in
this line of work will be gladly received by the author. With an
earnest prayer for the salvation of every prisoner, I remain,

  Yours in Him,
  E. E. BYRUM.

Moundsville, W. Va., July 4, 1901.




_CONTENTS._


                                                                   PAGE.

  In Prison.                                                           9

  Make the Best of It.                                                12

  Punishment.                                                         14

  Capital Punishment.                                                 22

  Life Imprisonment.                                                  26

  The Dungeon.                                                        28

  Cat-o’-nine-tails.                                                  33

  Buck and Gagged.                                                    34

  Lock-step March.                                                    34

  Literary Privileges.                                                37

  Tobacco Allowance.                                                  46

  The Prisoner’s Work.                                                47

  The Stockades.                                                      48

  The Chain Gang.                                                     49

  The Felon’s Cell.                                                   53

  The Library.                                                        56

  The Chapel.                                                         58

  Scaling the Prison Walls.                                           60

  A Prison Reform.                                                    64

  History of West Virginia Penitentiary.                              73
  (As Written by a Prisoner.)

  Letters from Prison Officials.                                     107

  Testimonies of Convicts.                                           121

  Released from Prison.                                              141




_LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS._


                                                                   PAGE.

  The Black List.                                                     19

  Cat-o’-nine-tails.                                                  31

  Lock-step March.                                                    35

  The Chain Gang.                                                     51

  Scaling the Prison Walls.                                           61

  Tracked by Bloodhounds—Captured.                                    69

  Penitentiary of the State of West Virginia.                        105

  The Younger Brothers.                                              145




_BEHIND THE PRISON-BARS._

[Illustration: Decoration]




IN PRISON.


Our country is called the land of the free, but could we at one glance
behold the thousands and tens of thousands now behind the prison-bars
and know their irksome lives, there would be an awakening in hearts
that have never known the bondage that exists in our midst.

A crime is perpetrated. Some one is arraigned before the court to
answer the charges as to whether he is guilty or not. The jury renders
a verdict, “Guilty.” The judge pronounces the sentence a term in
prison. The poor unfortunate is now considered a convict. Shackles are
brought to make him secure, in order to prevent his escape. An officer
accompanies him to his prison house, where he is to be in servitude
according to the length of his term of sentence. No one but the
prisoner realizes the awful feelings as the prison door shuts behind
him with a clang, and he hears the click of the lock fastening him in
an iron cell. Whether innocent or guilty, he feels the awful disgrace
upon himself and his friends. It would not seem so bad if only the
guilty were brought to justice in this way, but ofttimes the facts
reveal that not only hundreds, but thousands, of innocent persons are
thus sentenced and brought into disgrace, many of them serving a life
sentence.

There are two sides to prison life—a bright side, and a dark side. It
may be a query in the minds of some how there could be any enjoyment or
any bright side to such a life, but this will be clearly shown in other
chapters in this book. There are many things that go to make the prison
life a dark one. Viewing the matter from a natural standpoint, with no
one to look to but human help, the way does truly often look dark and
dreary. There are prisons where men are cast into dungeons and left to
almost starve to death, or they are bound hand and foot and beaten with
the cat-o-nine tails, or hanged by the thumbs, or made to pass through
some severe ordeal of punishment that is almost beyond human endurance.
Even in our own country there are yet stockades wherein prisoners do
not receive treatment that would elevate them nor fit them for the
higher circles of society. Many of these stockades wherein prisoners
have been kept during the years past have been but little, if any,
better in many respects than were the Andersonville or Libby prisons
during the Rebellion. There are exceptional cases to be sure. During
the past year a number of the states have not properly provided for
their prisoners. It has not been an uncommon thing in some of these
stockades to see a gang of men shackled together with chains, obliged
to go about with the clanking chains to their feet, under rigid rules,
and having to suffer the severe treatment of wicked and ungodly guards.

The National Prison Association, which is generally represented by
officers from the various prisons throughout the United States,
have for a number of years met annually to discuss the best modes
of handling and caring for the prisoners. Various methods have been
set forth. Experiments have been made, and too often it is the case
that hard-hearted officers have used the most excruciating means and
hard-heartedness in their dealings toward their prisoners, in order
to keep them in subjection. Some officers deem it necessary to speak
to prisoners in the sternest possible manner, imagining that being
cross, gruff, and surly toward them will make them feel a subordination
that can be brought about in no other way. This only deepens the
sorrows of the poor unfortunate prisoner and tends to harden his
heart and affections. Such officers forget that kind looks, gentle
actions, and words of encouragement fitly spoken will elevate a man
and encourage him to show his manhood and return the love by putting
forth his best efforts to show his appreciation of kindness. It is
true there are hard-hearted men in prison, men who would kill a man
for a trifle, whose consciences are seared over, as it were, yet there
are comparatively few men so hard-hearted but can be touched by love
and kindness. There are times when more severe punishment must be
inflicted, but the warden and prison officers who continually show
forth kindness toward the prisoners, greeting them with a smile and
words of encouragement, have but little trouble in bringing about a
great reform in the lives of those under their charge.




MAKE THE BEST OF IT.


There are thousands in prisons whose hands have been stained with the
blood of their fellow men; others whose hearts are hardened in sin
and their lives blackened with many crimes; while again, there are
those who are innocent, and some who have been cast into prison for
Christ’s sake. But whether innocent or guilty, the most expedient thing
is to make the best of the situation. Worrying over the separation
from friends, the disgrace that is brought about, and bewailing the
condition of things in general, will by no means help the matter. If
a sin or crime has been committed it is not hidden from the God of
heaven, and though the prisoner maybe shut in for years he can have the
soul liberated from all the sins committed, by confessing them unto
the Lord, calling upon him, and believing that he does forgive; as
the Bible tells us in 1 Jno. 1:9 that, “if we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.”

The dear prisoner should make a decision for the right at once, cast
away his gloom, doubts, and fears, and remember the words of the
apostle, who urges people to cast their care upon the Lord, for he
careth for them. He is a very present help in time of trouble. By the
help of Almighty God the prisoner can yet make his mark in the world.
He can rise above every foe and be of some use before his life closes.
While he is in the midst of the most desperate characters in the land,
yet he can have good associates. He can commune with God when alone
in his cell. He can call for good books and holy literature, read the
Bible, and make every effort to please the Lord and those around him.
He can so live that even the prison walls will be a hallowed spot unto
him. It was while John Bunyan was serving a twelve-year sentence in
prison that he wrote the notable book “The Pilgrim’s Progress,” which
has been a help and comfort to multitudes of people. He no doubt worked
often under adverse circumstances and completed his work through many
difficulties and much hard labor. Likewise Martin Luther translated the
New Testament while in prison, and wrote a number of other valuable
works. The apostle Paul wrote a number of his epistles while in prison.
He and others with him sometimes were punished by stripes until they
were left lacerated and bleeding, then cast into prison and bound
hand and foot. It was under such circumstances that one time Paul
and Silas were found praising the Lord, singing and shouting at the
midnight hour, when the Lord sent an earthquake and rent the prison
walls, throwing open the doors and loosing the shackles, setting them
free; but they did not flee from the prison until they received proper
orders. It was their faithfulness that caused the jailer to ask what
he should do to be saved. Paul told him to believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ. The generous jailor then took the brethren and washed their
stripes and properly cared for them, and soon they were dismissed and
sent on their way. It often happens that some must suffer an unjust
punishment. To such we can only say, Be of good courage; look up and
trust for better days.




PUNISHMENT.


People are sentenced to a term in prison on account of crime committed.
There are two systems of punishment. One is called punitive or
retributive system, the other the corrective or reformative. Until
within the last few years the punitive system was almost the exclusive
one. However, our humane officers, prison officials, lawmakers and
statesmen are not only learning better ways of bringing men and women
thus incarcerated into subjection, but in many places are making and
enforcing laws which require that prisoners be more humanely treated
and receive better care and accommodations. Men have resorted to
almost every possible device in order to make bad men good and raise
them from ignorance to intelligence, and in so doing have inflicted
the most severe punishment, causing the prisoners to pass through
severest ordeals and most terrible sufferings imaginable. When we say
there has been a radical change in many of our prisons in the land in
discarding the severe corporal punishment, we do not wish to convey
the idea that all prisons have yet accepted the more humane ways of
governing the prisoners under their charge. When we say some of these
punishments have been and are yet severe it does not fully express
the facts of the case. The word “severe” is not a strong enough word.
There have been and are yet punishments that are brutal—brutal to the
extreme. Many prisoners who are within the prison walls carry the deep
lash marks of the whip; the unjointed and deformed thumbs resulting
from the punishment of being hanged by the thumbs; and there are other
deformities. Many of us can no doubt remember the time of our early
days in the country school when the schoolmaster was almost constantly
with a beach or birch whip in his hand, something equal to an ox goad.
This instrument for correcting the youths of our land and bringing
them into subjection, when not in the schoolmaster’s hand was in the
corner near by and was generally freely used. There have been, however,
such a radical change and better modes of government brought about,
that many schools are taught without once using such an instrument of
punishment. If such a successful change has been made in our public
schools, surely as radical a change can be made in our prisons, to take
the place of the brutality of the past. Concerning the easy government
of the prisoners there is much that depends upon those in charge of the
prisoners. The warden, chaplain, and prison guards who have direct care
of the prisoners should be good, whole-souled men, kind and benevolent,
and who are capable of appreciating the good traits of a man even
though they may be covered by many dark ones. They should be good
readers of human nature and understand the dispositions of those under
their charge. They should be firm and unyielding to their trust, yet
loving and tender.

Mr. Meade, warden of the state prison at Auburn, N. Y., says: “Till the
nature of criminals undergoes a complete change, nay, till the nature
of man is much altered, there will be times when punishment must be
inflicted on prisoners. Much as we have gained on using the modern
reformed treatment, and much as we may justly expect to gain in the
future, the fact remains that there are times in the prison life of men
when the results of their former passions crop out irresistibly, making
them for a time not accessible to friendly reproof. At such times, for
the effect it has on others, but quite as much for its effect on its
misdemeanant, it is necessary to forcibly bring him to recognition of
his obligations and his duty. But to my mind forcible restraining,
or to employ the common term, punishing a convict, does not require
the use of the paddle or other instruments of torture; furthermore, in
my judgment, such process should be condemned in the strongest terms.
For they tend to imbitter not only the man punished but all prisoners
against the officers of the prison, the rules of the prison, and law
itself. One instance of the use of the paddle would do more to destroy
the desired friendly relation between officers and men than many months
of considerate treatment could restore. No! Experience has proved to
me that when it is imperative that an inmate be punished, the screened
cell or dungeon without discretion furnishes an effective mode. Such
cells should be kept dry and well ventilated, but wholly devoid of
furnishings. Confining men thus and supplying them with a very limited
amount of food and water has, in the great majority of cases which
have come under my observation, speedily brought the desired result of
making a man see the advisibility of abiding by the regulations of the
institution.”

There are also other ways, however, of vividly impressing the minds of
those who are disorderly, or who insist on not observing the prison
rules. Most prisons have what is called “short time;” that is, for
good behavior their sentence is shortened so many days each month, and
in some prisons a certain percentage of the worth of their labor is
placed to their credit for good behavior. One of the effective ways
of bringing them to time when they become stubborn and rebellious,
refusing to obey the rules, is to withhold the commutation, or short
time, and also deduct so much of the compensation money that has been
placed to their credit. This is generally much more effective and
pleads to the reason and common sense of the prisoner more than some
forcible persuasion by way of corporal punishment.

For certain offences some are black-listed to be punished in various
ways. One is, during working hours or while others are resting or at
services on Sunday, the disobedient convict is to march for a few hours
around the prison square and carry a heavy piece of railroad iron,
weighing from fifty to one hundred pounds.

[Illustration: The Black List.]

Captain Smith, a few years ago, in giving his biennial report of the
Kansas prison, said: “The discipline has been carefully looked after
and as a general thing prisoners yield to a strict discipline better
than most people think. They seem to see and realize the necessity of
rules and very seldom complain, if they violate them, at the punishment
that is sure to follow. Our punishments are of such a character that
they do not degrade. Kansas, when she established her penitentiary,
prohibited corporal punishment. She is one of the few states that
by law prohibits the use of the whip and strap, taking the position
that it is better to use kindness than to resort to brutal measures.
I have often been told, and that too by old prison men, that
it is impossible to run a prison and have first-class discipline
without the whip. Such is not my experience. We have had within our
walls perhaps as desperate men as ever received a sentence. We have
controlled them and have maintained a good discipline second to none
in the country. How did we accomplish this? Our answer is, By being
kind but firm, treating a man, although a prisoner, as a man, and if
he violates rules, lock him up and give him an opportunity to commune
with himself and his Maker; also give him to understand that he is the
executioner of his own sentence, and when he concludes that he can
do right, release him. It matters not how vicious, how stubborn, or
what kind of a temper he may have, when left with no one to talk to
and an opportunity to cool down and with the knowledge that when he
comes to the conclusion that he will do better he can be released, he
leaves the cell feeling very different from the prisoner who leaves
the whipping-post after having received any number of lashes that the
brutal officer may desire to inflict. One goes to his work cheerful
and determined to behave himself; the other dogged, revengeful, and
completely humiliated, only lives in hope that he may at some time take
his revenge upon the person that ordered or inflicted the punishment
and upon the state or country that would by its laws tolerate such a
brutal or slavish practice.”




CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.


Being put to death for crime or some misdemeanor is termed capital
punishment. This is not the most painful but is the most heinous of
all punishments. It is a heathenish practice, yet men make laws, sit
in judgment, render decisions, pronounce sentences, and thereby shed
the blood of their fellow men, trying to hide behind the laws that are
made, trying to screen themselves by the Bible, hoping all will be well
in the day of judgment. Because of such lawmakers and lawyers, many
are sentenced and hurled into eternity without being prepared to meet
God. Will God hold us innocent if we do such things? or if we cry not
out against such, will he not look down upon a government and nation
stained with human blood? Surely there is guilt that must be removed.
When the judge rises and pronounces the death sentence, to ease his
conscience in the matter he sometimes quotes from Genesis 9:6: “Whoso
sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed.” Even though that
scripture could apply in such cases in those days, it can not at the
present time. It is true that under the law of Moses life was given for
life as a punishment. For many trivial things people were stoned to
death, even for the breaking of the Sabbath.

“Then thou shalt give life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand
for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe
for stripe.”—Ex. 21:23-25.

“Then thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.”—Deut. 19:21.

“And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. And he that
killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast. And if a man cause
a blemish in his neighbor; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him;
breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a
blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him again. And he that killeth
a beast, he shall restore it: and he that killeth a man, he shall be
put to death.”

We are not living under the law of Moses in this day and age of the
world, neither are we justified by the law, but we are living in
a different dispensation. Paul says the law of Moses was a law of
bondage, and through Jesus Christ we are free from that bondage. The
law of Moses and the prophets were until John (Luke 16:16), and we now
live in the dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and nowhere
does he give men the privilege of making and enforcing laws that
would make the taking of man’s life justifiable. We do not read the
instructions of Jesus Christ to be “Life for life, eye for eye, and
tooth for tooth,” neither by way of rendering the sentence of the law
upon those who have taken the life of their fellow man, nor by acting
upon the impulse in taking revenge for personal offence or injury. In
speaking of the law of Moses and what was written concerning the people
of olden times, Jesus in that memorable sermon on the mount said: “Ye
have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth: but I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.”—Matt. 5:38,
39. Jesus Christ taught the law of love, even taught that we should
love our enemies and do good to them that hate us and despitefully use
us. He taught that people should show mercy to their fellow men. Even
when wicked Cain slew his brother Abel because of a slight offence,
and though he feared that men would put him to death, God gave him to
understand that he would not have him put to death, but that he should
be protected from such a penalty, although his hands were stained with
his brother’s blood.

In Galatians 5:4 Paul gave the people to understand that they were not
justified by the law of Moses; he said: “Christ is become of no effect
unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen
from grace.” Neither are people justified in the sight of God for
making and enforcing laws that will take the life of their fellow men.
Merely quoting the words, “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his
blood be shed,” will not remove the guilt. To call such lawmaking and
enforcement heathenism does not give full expression to the subject;
nay, it is barbarism in the extreme. Some may severely criticize these
terms and the views expressed here, but we fearlessly assert that
such is truth. We are glad to know that a few states in our so-called
land of liberty have become awakened on this line and refuse to make
or enforce such a law. Those who still try to hide behind the law of
Moses, why not carry out that law in full and stone to death every man
or woman who breaks the Sabbath?

There is another side to the picture. It is sometimes the case that
a man who is put to death is innocent of the crime for which he is
charged. Whether innocent or guilty, a great number of those thus
punished pass into eternity unsaved. With many of them it has been
an act performed on the impulse of the moment. Their former lives,
perhaps, have been upright, viewing them from a standpoint of morality.
Again, it is often the case that a family is left in a critical
condition to battle for life with this cold world. A delicate wife with
helpless children must thus be weighed down in sorrow and bereavement,
poverty staring them in the face, crushed with shame and disgrace, with
no one to provide for them and no help nor special protection from the
state whose laws have forever removed the one to whom they looked for
maintenance and protection.




LIFE IMPRISONMENT.


Life imprisonment is an unjust sentence. Life prisoners are those
who have received their sentence for murdering a fellow being. In
many cases, however, they can not really be classed as criminals.
They are victims of circumstances. The deed was not premeditated but
was brought about on the impulse of the moment. The sentence of a
lifelong imprisonment forever deprives of the liberties of freedom
and the association of friends and relatives, and the only hope of
freedom is an escape, then to remain a fugitive from justice. Mr.
Meade in his report suggests that the life prisoner should be allowed
the same privilege of commutation or short time as is given other
prisoners, and in this give him a hope of release. There are tables
which insurance companies use (and they are supported by the courts)
which fix an average limit of years of the existence of a man,
computing from the first year; the interval beyond the present age
naturally decreasing as old age approaches. He says: “It would seem
that these tables furnish a foundation on which a system for life
prisoners should be based. For instance, a man twenty years of age is
convicted of murder and sentenced to prison for life. Our tables show
that the average number of years for a man of that age still to live
is approximately thirty-four. Figuring the legal commutation on this
term of thirty-four years, we find the prisoner would be compelled
to serve about twenty-three years of solid time. A man thirty years
old would on the same basis, having about thirty years to live, serve
eighteen years; a man forty years old, having about twenty-five years
to live, would serve sixteen years in prison. Thus we might continue
our observations indefinitely.”

My views of this matter may be severely criticised, nevertheless
we do not consider that five years is unreasonably short for the
first offence of murder. This releases the innocent man who may
have been sentenced through circumstantial evidence or otherwise by
false accusation. It is a long sentence for a man who has acted on
the impulse of the moment or in a fit of anger; and even to the one
who has premeditated the crime, five years of hard labor and proper
training in a prison will be an impressive lesson to cause him not to
repeat the act. For a second offence it should not be more than ten
or fifteen years, and even for a third offence it would not be out of
reason to give him the life sentence with the regular commutation. This
reasoning may to many at first thought seem ridiculous, but upon proper
consideration we should remember that as long as there is life there
is hope, and while there is a possibility of reformation a man should
have some kind of a chance; not only a chance to reform, but a chance
to enjoy his liberty. Even after he has served two or three terms he
is not then a worse character and not more dangerous to a community
than thousands of others who are just as guilty but have not suffered
the penalty of the law. When a man has served according to the penalty
here suggested, has he not suffered sufficient to satisfy the law? and
should we not be willing to allow him the privileges of liberty and to
enjoy life once more? It is a hard heart indeed that will place a man
behind prison-bars for life. In England there is a possibility of being
set at liberty after twenty years, on account of good behavior. There
needs to be a radical change in our laws on this line.




THE DUNGEON.


This is the dreaded place of all prisons and in many places resorted to
oftener than necessary. Many prisoners who work in the mines have had
to go to the dungeon without their supper after laboring hard all day,
because ungodly and wicked guards reported a shortage in the proper
amount of coal mined, when the facts of the case were that the guards
had stolen or removed a portion of the coal from the car after it left
the prisoner, because of their dislike for the prisoner and by so doing
could have him punished. It also too often happens that prisoners
refuse to work as they should, and deserve the punishment. It is not
necessary to here describe the filthy, stifling, odorous dungeons
of war times or of some of the worst prisons of the day, but a
description of the dungeon of one of the best prisons in our land will
be sufficient. The following is a description given by one who served a
term in prison. In describing the punishment to secure good discipline,
he said:

“To me these contingency dungeons are, as their name implies, dark,
with similarity to an ordinary cell with the exception of a door which
in the common cell contains open spaces for the admission of light, but
the dark cell admits no light, and not a sufficient quantity of air.
There is no furniture in this dark cell. While undergoing punishment
if a prisoner desires to rest he can do so by reclining on the stone
floor. No refractory prisoner ever grows corpulent while confined in
these dark cells, as he receives only one meal of bread and water in
twenty-four hours. The prisoner is often kept in one of these cells
from eight to ten days. Sleep is almost impossible. When a prisoner
enters the dungeon he is required to leave behind him his coat, cap,
and shoes. During the winter months it is often very cold in these
cells, requiring the prisoner to walk up and down the dungeon in his
stocking feet to prevent his freezing, and this for a period of ten
days in nearly every instance compels submission. After the dark cells
thaw out in the summer months they are excessively hot. Sometimes in
winter the temperature is below zero, and in summer it often rises
to 100 degrees. They are then veritable furnaces. Generally after
the prisoner undergoes a freezing or baking process for eight or
ten days, he is willing to behave himself in the future. They are
sometimes so reduced and weakened that when brought out of the dark
cell they can scarcely walk without aid. I have seen them reel to and
fro like drunken men. They are often as pale as death. In many cases
the prisoner contracts cold which later on terminates fatally, and this
is one of the principal objections to this mode of punishment. If the
prisoner in the mine does not get out his regular weekly task of coal,
on Saturday he is reported to the deputy sheriff by the officer in
charge and is sent to the blind cell before supper and kept there until
the following Monday morning, when he is taken out and sent to his
work in the mines. While in there he gets only bread and water once in
twenty-four hours. This is a great inducement to work, which certainly
prevents criminals from shirking their labor, and soon converts the
lazy tramp into a hustling coal miner. If being in this dark cell
ten days and nights is insufficient to subdue a rebellious spirit of
the convict he is taken out and placed in the solitary cell. This is
similar to the ordinary cell with the exception that it contains no
furniture. Here the convict remains on bread and water until he is
starved almost to death or until he is willing to submit and do his
work as ordered.”

[Illustration: The Cat-o’nine-tails]




CAT-O’-NINE-TAILS.


A few years ago while visiting an Indiana penitentiary the warden said
that some years before they used the cat-o’-nine-tails in punishing
their prisoners, but had discarded that mode of punishment. There are
men both in prison and out of prison who carry furrows and scars on
their backs caused by the deep flesh wounds of the cat-o’-nine-tails.
This is a whip with lashes some of which have wire interwoven so as to
cut the flesh with every stroke. The poor prisoner must bare his back
and be chained or shackled to a post and beaten by a merciless officer,
who is often only too glad to wreak his vengeance in that way. It is
yet the case in many prisons and stockades that a similar punishment
is inflicted with the exception of not so many lashes, and a strap is
sometimes used, from two to four inches wide, made by sewing two pieces
of harness leather together. The same is perforated, soaked in water
over night, and dipped in the sand. This, when vigorously applied to
the bare flesh, causes the most excruciating pain. This is not in the
least overdrawing the picture of what is constantly put into practice
at the present time.




BUCK-AND-GAGGED.


This is another dreadful punishment which is still in vogue in some
places. The prisoner is taken and handcuffed, his hands slipped over
in front of his knees and sometimes a stick passed through just under
his knees and over his wrists, his mouth opened ofttimes by force, and
filled with a large cork or piece of wood, and left in this condition
until life is almost extinct. This punishment is serious and is apt to
make the prisoner revengeful instead of making him feel that he has
been justly punished.




THE LOCK-STEP MARCH.


[Illustration: The Lock-step March]

The lock-step march is a humane punishment, yet when continued a
great length of time is very tiresome. Prisoners who have been guilty
of some trivial offence during the week, and who are not otherwise
punished, are generally called upon to fall in line and proceed to the
open square of the prison, and there while the other prisoners are
resting or at chapel exercises they must keep in constant motion in the
lock-step march. This punishment is not as severe as some others, yet
it is not a desirable punishment, especially when the others are all
enjoying a rest or comfortably seated in the chapel during religions
services. When the hundreds of prisoners are gathered in the chapel
on Sunday morning and comfortably seated, the warden or some other
officer reads the names of those who are to join in the lock-step
march. It is not for them to retaliate nor plead their innocence,
neither wait to be told the second time. As soon as their names are
called they must immediately rise and as the last name is called they
are all marched out to the prison yard and there begin their tiresome
march. Some who have committed greater offences must walk in front and
carry heavy bars of iron. This punishment is given to stimulate them to
observe the proper rules and discipline of the prison.




LITERARY PRIVILEGES.


The literary privileges are so widely different in the various prisons
throughout the land that it would be very difficult to render the
proper information. There are some penitentiaries, and especially
the stockades of the South, without libraries, and many prisoners
even serve a term without being granted any educational privileges
whatever, either by way of literary work or reading of good books. It
is more difficult in the stockades to give the literary privileges
than in other established prisons. However, there are states with
established penitentiaries that have not provided the same with
libraries and proper literary accommodations. On the other hand,
many of the penitentiaries have established schools wherein prisoners
can obtain a fair education. For instance, the Michigan state prison
more than twenty-five years ago established graded schools, and all
prisoners who have not a fair education are required four evenings of
the week to attend these schools for an hour and a half. In this way
the prisoner is not only benefited, but it brings him under a new line
of discipline that enables the officer in charge to become familiar
with his mental condition and capabilities and more fully understand
the dispositions of those under his charge. Men who are thus drilled
and properly cared for, after going through this discipline day after
day, cause less trouble to those in charge. In the prisons where the
most humane reformative system of management is used there can be many
things brought to bear upon the minds of the prisoners that will tend
to elevate them and fit them for the higher circles of society. By the
proper treatment and privileges they will soon learn to have a taste
for literary work. A few prisons give the prisoners the privileges
of general literary work, such as delivering orations, recitations,
essays, debates, etc. These things, while they educate and develop
the mind, have a tendency to divert the mind of the prisoner from the
feelings of disgrace and the deplorable situation; and instead of
spending hours brooding in despondency it awakens an activity of the
mind and new thoughts for consideration during the solitary hours.

Every prison should supply each cell with a Bible. Many do this while
others do not. The prisoners should also have access to the library and
permission to call for any book in the library. Where they are thus
looked after it is the duty of certain prisoners to go to each cell and
learn what book is desired for the coming week and to take up the one
which was in their possession during the past week. These requests are
taken to the librarian and the books selected and distributed according
to number. Prisoners who mutilate or destroy the books in any way are
denied the privilege of having a book to read for a few weeks. If the
offence is repeated the punishment on this line is more severe and they
are then neither allowed to receive a book or paper or are refused all
privileges of the library and not even allowed to have paper or writing
material to communicate with their friends. With most prisoners this
is a severe punishment. One who has not been thus incarcerated or had
to spend weeks and months in solitude can scarcely realize the value
of good books to read under such circumstances. But he who has had the
actual experience knows just how to appreciate such a privilege.

During the civil war a number of Union men made a daring raid through
the Confederate line and were afterward captured and cast into dungeons
where they spent weeks of suffering, amid heart-rending scenes, and
notwithstanding their extreme hunger, thirst, and the stifling odor of
their dark underground prison and suffering much from their shackles
and clanking chains, they were taken from place to place and then
brought to trial. Seven of their number were hanged, leaving about a
dozen remaining who were expecting to be called out to follow in their
footsteps at any time. Through some sudden change or maneuver of war
the remainder of these men were left in prison with guards over them
and only a meager supply of food. As the seven of their comrades were
taken from their midst to the place of execution those who remained
were in much distress of mind. During the morning hours before this
they had spent the time in playing cards, now and then an oath escaping
their lips, but now the scene changed. Some one suggested that they
should pray. There was but little hope of them escaping the fate of
their comrades and thus soon be hurled into eternity, and what added
more to the darkness of the hour was the fact that they had not
made their peace with God. One of the surviving party describes the
occurrence as follows:

“From this time forward we had religious exercises morning and evening
and found them a great consolation and support. We began and closed
the day right and thus added sweetness to all its hours, supplying
a subject of thought not bearing directly upon our future gloomy
prospects and thus enabling us to maintain better mental health. We
always sang a hymn or two on these occasions. We sang ‘Rock of Ages,’
‘Jesus, Lover of my Soul,’ and others of a pronounced spiritual cast.
This greatly astonished the guards. They were given strict charge to
watch us closely with the statement that we were the most desperate
characters in the whole United States. Then to hear us singing ‘hymns’
and know that we had prayer morning and evening was a contradiction
they found hard to reconcile.... What would we not now have given for
the counsels and assistance of a minister whom we could fully trust!
Just how to be religious was the puzzle. I know if I had a command to
execute from an army officer I would do it, if in my power, no matter
how difficult or dangerous, and I wished intensely that it was just as
easy to be religious as to be a soldier; but there was the question of
right feelings and right motives that did not seem to come into play
very much in the army. For if a soldier did his duty he was not apt to
be asked how he felt about it. I had the belief that I must have joy
and rapture in thinking of death and readiness to shout God’s praises,
which I did not feel; and for a time it seemed as if I could not
reach a genuine conversion. I diligently read the Bible which we had
borrowed, and while I enjoyed many things in it, little direct guidance
for me was found. I asked counsel of our captain for whom I had the
greatest esteem and respect, but it was so easy for him to believe
that I thought his case must be very unlike my own, so I spoke to
another one of our company, the only one of our number who had a clear
religious faith, and seemed to be happy in it. His first answer was
very striking. I asked how he felt about death. He thought I referred
to our worldly prospect, and answered that probably we would soon
all be put to death. ‘But what is your feeling about death itself?’
I continued. He said, ‘I am not afraid to die if it is God’s will. I
trust him now and I expect to trust him to the last.’

He took my hand and there was a steady light in his eye that made me
believe every word he said. But when I asked him how he got such a
faith, he could only tell me that he went to a ‘mourners bench’ two
years before and sought till he found it. This did me no good, for
there was no place accessible here. In sore perplexity I read the Bible
from day to day and prayed, taking my turn in praying aloud and reading
with the others. At length I thought I began to see that trusting
Christ must be something like taking his words and teachings for my
guide, trying to do all that he commanded, and leaving the result while
I did this with him. This was not that sudden transformation that I
had hoped, but I soon found that it opened up a good many things that
I had never dreamed of. One of these seemed especially strange under
the circumstances. I had yet but a slender hope of ever escaping from
the prison except by the way of the scaffold. But in spite of that dark
prospect as an absolute test of my obedience—‘Will you, if satisfied
that it is God’s will, be ready to give up the profession of law if you
ever get home and go into the ministry?’ The first and spontaneous
reply was, No! I had studied law and meant to practice it if I ever got
where law reigned. But at once the self response was clear, ‘What kind
of obedience was this?’ I saw that I was not sincere in professing to
enlist under Christ as my captain unless I would really obey him. It
would be a poor allegiance that stopped short with the things I wanted
to do. For a long time I could not pass this point. The difficulty
when communicated to my prison companions seemed utterly absurd. ‘Try
to serve God in the prison where you are,’ they said with a cheer
plausibility, ‘and do not bother about preaching, being a lawyer or
anything else, when you get out, for you never will get out.’ This
seemed good advice but it would not give a serene mind or the victory
over the fear of death, which I so much desired.

“One after another of those in the prison found the comfort I lacked.
And it was not until wearied and worn-out that I vowed that if God
would only give me peace I would serve him as sincerely in prison or
out of it as I had tried to serve my country, and in any way he might
direct. From this time I did have a steady conviction that I was on the
Lord’s side and that I had a right to commit myself and my life to his
keeping. Though all newspapers were strictly forbidden, yet through
the kindness of negro waiters we were supplied and thus kept posted
regarding war news.... We all remember with deepest gratitude the visit
of a minister. When he left he promised to send us some books and did
not forget to promptly forward them. These we took good care of, read
thoroughly to all in the room, and then returned, asking for more.
These he generously gave and we thus continued until we had read nearly
his whole library. Those only who know what a dreadful weariness it is
to pass days without any definite employment can realize the great boon
these good books bestowed on us. It made the prison room a veritable
school, and in view of our religious efforts the character of the books
was just what we would most have desired, as they were of a religious
cast, which only made them the more welcome. But there is no employment
upon which I look back with more pleasure than that for which the
minister’s books furnished us the material. With fifteen persons in
a room not more than eighteen feet square it was needful to preserve
quiet if any reading must be done. We therefore appointed regular
reading hours, two in the forenoon and the same in the afternoon.
During this time no one was permitted to speak above a low whisper and
all noise and running about was forbidden. Those who did not wish to
read might sleep. Sometimes the books were read silently, but for a
part of the time in nearly every period a volume of general interest
would be selected and read aloud. These books would often furnish
subjects and arguments for discussion in the debating periods that
followed. We gained a great deal of knowledge in our novel school,
which has been of lifelong value. Books of travel, adventure, history,
biography, and theology—no fiction—were freely read and brought the
freshness of the outside world into our dreary captivity.”

The foregoing gives us a vague idea of what can be done for the welfare
of the prisoners in the jails, work-houses, and penal institutions of
our land, towards making the prisoners happy by supplying them with
good books, tracts, papers, and such like. Oh, the neglect on this
line! Were prisoners thus supplied, their minds would not be occupied
during the solitary hours in scheming and planning the best modes of
perpetrating crime. Get a man interested in a good book and you thus
place him in good company. He may never see you, but with deep feelings
of gratitude will ever have the kindest feelings toward those who
thus bestowed the kind favor of placing him in possession of such a
companion.

For the entertainment of the prisoner and to develop an interest in
literary work they have been allowed to publish prison papers. Some
of these are very small while others are large and well edited. About
three years ago at Sing Sing Prison, in the state of New York, it was
decided to issue a bi-weekly twenty-six-page paper to be edited and
printed entirely by convicts. No article is allowed in the paper except
those composed and furnished by the inmates of the prison. When papers
are thus printed and distributed among the prisoners it has a great
controlling influence and creates a general interest in literary work.




TOBACCO ALLOWANCE.


Most prisoners are users of tobacco, yet there are many who do not use
it. Some prisons allow a pound of tobacco a month, some two pounds
every month. This is generally manufactured at the prison where it is
used. One of the modes of punishment, and a very effective one too, is
to deprive the men of their tobacco for disobedience. With many this is
one of the most severe punishments instituted. When a man enters prison
he is given a copy of the rules of the prison and also a ticket stating
the privileges of the use of the library, books, letter-writing,
tobacco allowance, etc. Failure to comply with the rules ofttimes means
to be deprived of these privileges for a month or longer. Some time
ago we placed a number of tracts in prisons showing the evil effects
of tobacco on the human system, the filthiness and offensiveness of
tobacco, etc., and we were pleased to note the results by way of
convincing many prisoners to discontinue the use and give up the habit.
While some are able by strong willpower to discontinue the use of it,
yet but comparatively few people can in their own strength quit its use
and rid themselves of the appetite. But many can testify that they have
not only been able to quit its use, but have had the appetite removed
by the power of God in answer to prayer.




PRISONERS’ WORK.


Men and women are sent to prison to work. The sentence is generally
so many years in state prison at hard labor. It is right and proper
that they should work and should be made to work faithfully. It is
not supposed that they receive a sentence to enter a paradise for so
many years. In the different prisons the work is quite different.
There are prisons where the prisoners are required to spend almost
their entire time of working hours from 600 to 800 feet under ground
digging coal. At some places the veins of coal are so shallow that the
prisoners are compelled to lie down and stretch themselves out or be in
a half-way sitting posture while at their work. Such prisoners often
contract colds, rheumatism, and other diseases which rapidly shorten
their lives. In other prisons they are taken out in gangs to work on
the public highways and crush stone. However, some prisons furnish the
prisoners work within the prison walls. Much of this labor is let out
to contractors who have a business of making clothing, harness, whips,
brooms, etc. In such cases the contractors pay the state a small amount
each day for the labor of the prisoners. Many complaints have been
made, and many of them justly, because of the unfair requirements and
treatment of the prisoners. This should be more carefully looked after
by the prison inspectors of the state, and we are glad to know that in
many places it is receiving attention.

The time for working ranges from ten to fourteen hours per day. In the
United States prison at Leavenworth, Kans. they rise at six o’clock,
and when the men are ready to go to their work, three hundred of them
march two miles and one-half to their work, a hundred more go two miles
in another direction to work on a farm, while others are otherwise
occupied till six o’clock in the evening. As a general thing, if the
prisoner is careful to obey the rules and work well, he is not likely
to have much trouble with the officials. However, in some prisons very
few escape extra punishments of some kind.




THE STOCKADES.


The stockade is an enclosure, or pen, made with posts or sticks stuck
in the ground. It is generally a temporary affair. These are to be
found in the South and Southwest mostly. Here is where the worst
treatment is to be found among the prisoners. Some of the southern
states are providing better for their prisoners, but others are far
behind what they should be. A stockade is sometimes made on the top
of a mountain or in some suitable place for working mines. In these
southern states not only mining is carried on by the prisoners, but
building of roads, railroads, and such like. For instance, where a
railroad is being built, large cars are roughly and strongly built in
which the prisoners are locked when not at their work. Women in some of
these places are required to clear the land, roll logs, do drudgery,
and in many instances are so shamefully used and treated that it is a
disgrace to a civilized nation. But while such is the case there are
noble men and women who are not connected with the prison, as well as
many of the more noble prison officers who have been working faithfully
for years to bring about a prison reform, and much has been done and is
being done on that line. However, could the veil be drawn aside that
all might fully realize the situation, the reformation would be more
rapid and effective. The stockades do not have literary privileges as
a general thing as do our older and well-established prisons. We have
received communications from officers in these stockades who are very
anxious to have good literature placed at their disposal, assuring us
that the same would be highly appreciated and used to the advantage of
the prisoners.




THE CHAIN GANG.


It is not an uncommon thing to see a chain gang of prisoners,
especially about the stockades. Sometimes they are marched to and from
their work shackled with handcuffs, while others are fastened with
clanking chains. There are also men to be found with iron bands or
rings welded around their necks, to which a chain is fastened with the
other end of the chain attached to a ball to prevent their escape.
These are generally the most desperate characters.

To those who are acquainted with such scenes it is shocking indeed,
and creates a feeling of pity and sympathy which calls for a more
humane treatment in behalf of the poor unfortunates. There are men who
serve almost an entire term of sentence in stocks or irons, or go to
their work in the chain gang, because of a lack of proper provision of
accommodations on the part of the state or government, or by unjust,
inhumane treatment.

Few men have fallen so low in sin and degradation, or have been so
hardened by crime, but yet have at least a spark of humanity or manhood
which can be kindled to a flame by proper humane and reformative
treatment; where, on the other hand, an undue amount of the imposition
of irons and chains causes them to grind with revenge, and seemingly
the little spark of manhood is seared over with a more hardened
conscience, leaving him still a criminal almost beyond redemption.

[Illustration: The Chain-gang.]




THE FELON’S CELL.


When one is taken to serve a term in prison, has exchanged his
citizen’s clothes for a suit of stripes, is measured, and a full
description is written in the prison books, he is taken to a cell which
is to be his future abode during his confinement, except what time
he is at work, at his meals, or is otherwise stationed by the prison
officers. We can here only give a description of what is commonly found
to be a prison cell. It is a small iron room with a stone floor, and
when two convicts are to occupy the same cell, there are two bunks or
beds in the cell. The bed-rack is made of iron or wood slats, and the
bed-tick is generally filled with corn-husks or some similar material,
likewise the pillow. When the beds are not in use they are fastened
to the side of the wall with a chain. When down and in use they take
up nearly the entire space of the cell, so that it is impossible for
the two occupants to pass each other in walking to and fro. The other
furniture generally consists of a small tinbucket holding about two
quarts of water, and a washbasin. A short-handled broom is also found
in one corner of the cell with which the convict brushes it every
morning. The walls are either iron or stone, decorated with a small
looking-glass and a towel. Each cell contains one chair, as there is
not room for two; so that when one sits on the chair the other stands
or occupies a seat on the stone floor. The door is made of half-inch
iron bars crossing each other at right angles, leaving spaces about two
by six inches. Through these spaces come the air, light, and heat.

To give the reader an idea of how one would naturally feel on the
first introduction to such a place, we will give it in the language of
a prisoner, who says: “After examination I was shown to my cell. It
was now about two o’clock in the afternoon of my first day in prison.
I remained in the chair during the entire afternoon. Of all the dark
hours of an eventful history none have been filled with more gloom and
sadness than those of my first day in prison. All my life I moved in
the highest circles of society, surrounded by the best and purest of
both sexes, and now I was in the deplorable condition of having been
hurled from that high social condition down to the low, degraded plane
of a convict. As I sat there in that desolate abode of the disgraced I
tried to look out down the future. All was dark. For a time it seemed
as if that sweet angel we call Hope had spread her wings and taken her
departure from me forever. The black cloud of despair somewhat settled
down upon me. But very few prisoners possess the ability to make
anything of themselves after having served a term in the penitentiary.
I sat brooding over these things for an hour or more and my manhood
asserted itself and hope returned. I reasoned thus: I am a young man,
I enjoy good health, there will be only a few months of imprisonment,
and then I will be free. I thought of my loving wife, little children,
my aged mother, my kind friends, and for their sake I would not yield
to despair. Soliciting aid of a kind heavenly Father I resolved to do
the best I could toward regaining what I had lost. I was aware of the
fact that when I got out of the penitentiary all the money I would
have with which to make another start in life would be five dollars.
The United States presents her prisoners upon discharge with a suit of
citizens’ clothes and five dollars. This was my capital.”

Truly such a sad condition would be deplorable, but the prisoner can
only assert his manhood, lay his plans for the future, and determine to
rise above it all, which is not impossible. Many have risen to a good
standing in life. What has been done can be done again.

Prisoners who are sentenced to be hanged are generally taken to a
cell in the execution house separate from the other prisoners. The
convict thus doomed spends the time in this prison and is not required
to work. A few months ago I visited a prison, and in the execution
building I found two prisoners in solitary cells. One seemed to have
made his peace with God, but the other was in deep trouble over his
soul, was not ready to meet God, and had only a few more days to live.
It seemed he could not pray. He had been reading his Bible and other
religious books, but hope had almost fled. After talking with him for
a time, I said, “Young man, your time is short unless God in some way
intervenes. If you have been guilty of crime and are trying to hide
it from your fellow men or denying the charge, you can not hide it
from God. Acknowledge before him the facts as they are and call upon
him for help.” After praying with him for a while he gave vent to his
feelings in most earnest pleas to God, crying out, “I am a murderer.”
He continued his earnest pleas until the Lord did forgive him. A week
or two later when the death sentence was read to him in his cell, he
was ready, and made the remark that they could only take away his
breath, for his soul would be forever landed in peace. I saw him march
up to the gallows, and as his legs and arms were being strapped and
a rope tied about his neck he glanced heavenward as if breathing a
silent prayer, and when the electric signal was given, he dropped into
eternity.




THE LIBRARY.


While many prisons are not yet supplied with a library, there are
efforts being made on this line for the education and elevation of
the minds of the prisoners. For those who have already received an
education there are many valuable books in the library to furnish them
something to occupy their minds at such times as they may have to read.
Some states furnish so many thousand books and an appropriation of $500
a year for library purposes. Among the books furnished are scientific
works, history, biography, and others of a religious and moral nature,
together with many novels and works of fiction. The Christian people
of our land should see to it that a greater number of books of a real
spiritual cast are placed at the disposal of prisoners.

About two years ago, after receiving some earnest letters of
appreciation and thankfulness from prisoners who had received books
and papers, a deeper sympathy was awakened in their behalf. For
some days I became greatly burdened in behalf of a certain prison,
concerning supplying the prisoners with a library of good books. Not
knowing whether they had a library or whether the prison officials
would receive the books and put them into the hands of the prisoners, I
hesitated. As the burden for this matter could not be so easily thrown
off, my next step was to visit the prison and make investigations
through the prison officials, and was not a little surprised to find
they were without a library, though at that time were preparing a large
library room, intending to make a plea to the people for a donation
of books. As soon as the room was finished it was my pleasure to see
that $1000 worth of well-bound books were placed in the library for
the prisoners, being donated by those who have an interest in the men
behind the bars. It has also been a source of gratitude to know that
these books have been appreciated and enjoyed by the many prisoners who
read them in their cells and in the library.

In some prisons about twenty per cent. or more of the prisoners are
unable to read or write. For this reason schools are being formed
where such, especially those who desire to do so, can have a chance to
receive an education. These schools are generally held in the library
room and taught by one of the prisoners.




THE CHAPEL.


The chapel is the place where prisoners get most of their public
instruction aside from what is obtained in the library. It is not
often that they have the privilege of attending educational lectures
as if they were attending a college or public school; however, in our
better prisons steps are being taken to give the well-behaved prisoners
advantages on this line occasionally. The general meetings on Sunday
are held in the chapel, to which the prisoners are marched in regular
order, where several hundred are in weekly attendance. The chaplain
generally conducts the regular services or has ministers from the city
to take their turns in preaching to them. Prison evangelists are often
given the privilege of talking to the prisoners or visiting them at
their cells for the welfare of their souls. There are prisons where
all visitors and gospel workers are admitted free, while other prisons
charge twenty-five cents admission fee. Aside from what is known as
the regular chapel services, the prisoners who desire to meet before
that hour or remain after, in a social religious prayer-service or
Bible class, can have the privilege of doing so. All prisoners are
allowed to sing at the general services, although they generally have
a select choir. One man in giving a report of the prison choir said:
“At one time we had two horse thieves, two rapists—one with a sentence
of forty years—three murderers, two hog thieves, and several others
with equally villainous records.” It would be difficult at such a place
to select a choir that had a clean past record. While these men were
criminals when incarcerated, some of them will doubtless always remain
criminals, while others have so reformed as to be worthy of a better
name.

Many prisoners during their confinement actually get a real experience
of salvation, and those desiring to be baptized by immersion go from
the chapel to the laundry, and there in a well-filled tank or long
troughlike tub receive the ordinance of baptism. The chapel does
not have stained-glass windows nor the finery of many modern church
buildings; nevertheless the place is supposed to have everything neat
and in order, and the men are to observe the strictest decorum and
reverence while in attendance.




SCALING THE PRISON WALL.


There are in almost every prison those who are called
“trusties”—prisoners who are given the privilege of doing work outside
of the prison, going on errands, etc., without the presence of a guard.
Others have unusual liberties within the prison walls. Life prisoners
and those who have received a sentence for a number of years and
have not yet made up their minds to reform, often give the officials
considerable trouble in trying to make their escape; although, as a
general thing, life prisoners are well-behaved persons. There have
been some noted and desperate efforts made to escape prison. Desperate
characters have used all their ingenuity in devising plans for an
escape and watch an opportunity to raise an insurrection at a critical
time. There have been times when the insurrection was so great as to
defy the prison officials, and the disturbance could only be quelled
by the daring boldness and wisdom of the warden or general officer in
charge. When a number of desperate prisoners get such an advantage
they will fearlessly face death rather than yield. A few such noted
instances are on record. It is, however, very difficult for a prisoner
to make good his escape. If successful he must go under an assumed name
and always be a fugitive from justice. If a failure is made he is apt
to have to serve his full sentence instead of having advantage of the
commutation of “short time.”

[Illustration: Scaling the Prison Walls.]

Bloodhounds are kept at the present time for the purpose of capturing
those who try to make their escape, and there are men behind the
prison walls who carry ugly scars made from deep flesh wounds by the
bloodhounds during the time of their capture. There are times when a
fire breaks out in a prison which must receive immediate attention
of all available help. It is at such times that desperate characters
undertake to raise an insurrection and make their escape. Many
prisoners have been known at such times to show their manhood, and
offer their services and manifest their loyalty by aiding the officers
in keeping the prisoners in subjection and in extinguishing the flames.
Such prisoners should be highly rewarded, and many of them shortly
afterward receive their pardon in honor of their loyalty and good
principles shown. The prisoner who desires to have favors shown him in
prison should, upon first entering, decide to obey the prison rules
to the best of his ability. Anything to the contrary will bring the
ill favor of the prison officials upon him. An attempt to escape will
not be forgotten and he will be very closely watched and denied many
privileges which he could have otherwise enjoyed, and is not apt to be
made a “trustie.” It is therefore a wise plan to decide upon perfect
submission from the beginning of the confinement.




A PRISON REFORM.


The highest ideal of prison life is not simply punishment for evil
doing, but should be a reformation in the lives of those who are thus
incarcerated. We are glad to know that there is really a reformation
being brought about in the rules and government of the prisons in our
land.

It is said of one of the kings in a country in Europe that, being
desirous of knowing how the common people lived, he dressed himself
as a peasant or tramp and went about from place to place among the
poorer class of people, and while thus lounging about the city he was
met by a policeman who demanded him to give an account of himself. Not
giving the proper satisfaction, the policeman hurried him off to a
dungeon-like cell. The prisons under that king’s domain were in a sad
condition—dirty, filthy, alive with vermin, and were most degrading
places. Thus the king was obliged to spend the night in such horrible
quarters, which was in great contrast to the royal palace. However,
it was a night well spent, though but little enjoyed by the king. He
was touched as never before by a sympathetic feeling for the poor
unfortunate human beings who were cast into such places. He at once
ordered a renovation of all the prisons throughout his kingdom.

Aside from our penitentiaries, there are jails, work-houses, and
places of imprisonment, many of which are allowed to become filthy,
with lice and other vermin in almost every crevice, making the place
not only extremely unpleasant but unhealthful to every inmate. No doubt
if many of our lawmakers and other influential people of our country
were compelled to spend a few days or nights in such prisons there
would speedily be a great reformation in the prisons of our own land.

Aside from cleanliness and government of prisons and jails there
is a reformation in which we can all have a part, and help to
point the unfortunate ones to Him who is able “to bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of
the prison-house.”—Isa. 42:7. A number of our penitentiaries have
comparatively good libraries furnished by the state; some have not yet
been supplied with libraries; and even among those that are supplied
there are more novels than good, wholesome religious works. However, in
some prisons each prisoner is supplied with a Bible of small print, and
there has been an earnest plea from the prisoners for good, wholesome
religious literature by way of books, tracts, papers, etc. Our jails
have as a general thing been sadly neglected on this line.

A few months ago we made an effort through the Gospel Trumpet
Publishing Company, of Moundsville, W. Va., to supply jails and prisons
with small libraries of good unsectarian religious books, such as would
be a benefit to the prisoners and tend to lead them to a higher aim
in life. We were soon greatly surprised to realize the demand from
prisoners for such literature. A few hundred jails were thus supplied
with libraries and religious papers. It was almost astonishing to learn
in reply by their letters of appreciation that in many places they had
never been thus remembered before. Some prisoners had been in for a
number of months without any religious reading matter and scarcely any
one to visit them.

Being thus reminded of a lack of duty brought to mind the words of
Jesus, as mentioned in the twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew, wherein he
was speaking of the end of time when the nations should gather before
him and he would separate the good from the bad. And we read where he
says, “Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat:
I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me
in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was _in
prison_, and ye came unto me.... Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one
of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.”

My dear reader, how will it be with us when we appear before the King
in all his glory in that day? Can he say of us that he was in prison,
and we came unto him? Or shall he be compelled to utter these words:
“Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I
was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me
not in: sick, and _in prison_, and ye visited me not. Inasmuch as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me”?

While we enjoy our beautiful homes and the pleasures of life and
freedom, the question comes directly, Have we done our duty toward
the prisoner? Have we visited Jesus in the prison? We may not be able
to go there in person, but we can visit them by providing them with
silent messengers by way of good books, tracts, papers, etc. There are
doubtless thousands of professing Christians who never gave a dollar to
help a prisoner, who never visited a prison in person or in any other
way. There are those who could spend hundreds of dollars in supplying
prisons and would not feel the weight of it financially, but we should
make an effort on this line by giving to the extent that we may feel
the weight of the sacrifice, and thereby God will be greatly glorified
and many prisoners led to seek the Lord and live a pure and holy life.

Some of the most intelligent and highly educated men are found behind
the prison-bars and fill felons’ cells. It is not always the man of low
type, ignorant and uneducated, that thus meets his doom. There are men
and women from every class of society. There are men who are hardened
in crime, whose consciences seem seared, yet none so hard-hearted,
none so low down in the depths of sin that they have not a spark of
manhood to which there is an appeal. Brutal treatment will not reach
such specimens of manhood; however, they must be brought under strict
discipline of the requirements of servitude and given to understand
that perfect obedience is required; yet with all that, when they are
told in a kind, gentle, loving manner and given to understand that they
are entitled to the best privileges of the prison as they deserve it,
that little spark of manhood will soon be kindled into a flame. There
are prisons where a small per cent. of the monthly earnings are placed
to their credit, which in a few years amounts to a large enough sum
to give them a fair start at the time of their release. If they are
disobedient, so much is taken from their credit. But aside from the
kind moral treatment there must be something more effective. The hearts
of these hardened criminals must be changed by the power of God. The
prison officials who fail to realize or recognize this necessity have
to a great extent failed in their reformative efforts. Every effort
possible should be extended in behalf of the spiritual welfare of the
prisoners.

[Illustration: Tracked by Bloodhounds—Captured.]

There is an evil existing in our jails and work-houses that is
startling and alarming, nevertheless it continues throughout the
breadth of our land. A young man or wayward boy is arrested for some
trivial offense; it is probably the first time he has been guilty of
thus breaking the law. He is placed behind the prison-bars to await a
preliminary hearing before a justice of the peace. He is then liable to
be sentenced for from thirty to ninety days in jail, or bound over to
court, which is to be in session a few weeks or months later. In the
meantime he is confined in the jail to await his arraignment before the
court.

Let us now take a look at the jail itself and its inmates. It is well
secured with solid walls, iron doors, and prison-bars. There are a few
private cells, a broad hallway, and large room into which from five to
fifty persons are confined. Sometimes even a greater number are thus
imprisoned without grade or discrimination of crime. The tender youth
must intermingle with those who are steeped in sin and hardened in
crime. He is here taught to play cards, read novels, use vulgar and
profane language, practice the most vile habits, plan for burglaries,
and comes forth a rogue at heart, and a hardened criminal. Otherwise,
had there been the proper discrimination, separating those who are just
starting on the downward course from the hardened criminals, there
would be a reformation in their lives instead of a degeneration. These
are facts that can not be denied—facts that stare us in the face, and
are sad truths that will continue to hover over us, as it were, until
the good people rise up and protest against it for a proper reformation
on this line. The good people of our land would be surprised, yea,
stricken with consternation, were they to visit most jails and
work-houses and make a thorough investigation, to behold the filth and
general sanitary condition of the place, which is infested with lice
and other vermin.

It is right and proper to send people to jail or prison who will not
behave themselves. They need both punishment and reformation. This
can be done effectually and with good results if the proper course is
pursued.




_HISTORY OF WEST VIRGINIA PENITENTIARY._

WRITTEN BY A PRISONER.


In 1863 the state was admitted as one of the constellation of states
of the union. Virginia had seceded from the union by a majority vote.
The strong and indomitable minority citizens of the Old Dominion
residing in the western part of it, many of whom were Scotch and Irish
descendants and natives of the adjoining states, who had taken up their
homes in the valleys and on the hillsides, were loyal to the Union,
loved well the flag, and reverenced with an undying affection the
builders of the union of states for the greater blessing of the people,
and stood firm and unyielding for an indivisible united country. By
their hands and brave hearts they built a state stretching from the
Potomac to the Ohio river, carved out of the Old Dominion. The war-born
daughter of the historical commonwealth proved, in the subsequent
years, to be rich in the production of materials in active demand in
the marts of commerce, and she now outstrips her mother state in the
race for greatness, prosperity, and happiness.

Many regions of the state are mountainous, and the principal industries
are lumbering, mining, and oil production. Many of the white people
are typical mountaineers and somewhat rough and uncouth in manner,
while the negroes, many of them, have drifted from North and South
Carolina, Alabama, and other southern states to be employed in the
development of these industries.

There are very many respectable farmers, professional and business men,
and cultured ladies residing in these almost inaccessible parts; but
the rough element in many places predominates, and the order of the
day and night is drinking and brawling, ending as a rule in desperate
encounters and murder. Most of the white and black inmates of the
penitentiary have been and are now composed of the lawless men from
these regions, from the time it was only a stockade of ten acres in
1866, when Hon. J. W. McWhorter of the Tenth Judicial District was
appointed warden by Governor Boreman. He resigned the position after
viewing it. In a letter to Warden Hawk he states it was for the reason
that there was not so much as a building erected for the shelter of the
inmates, and he thought he could not work the convicts to advantage
under the circumstances. The penitentiary has been improved from time
to time to the present, by additions, until it is a massive structure
of stone and iron, with a high stone surrounding wall. It has 695
inmates at the present writing.

The center, or main building, is built after the old baronial
castellated style of architecture, and with its several stories
height, it makes an imposing appearance. It is flanked on the north
and south by the stone and strongly-barred buildings, wherein the old
and first built stone cells and the modern steel ones—900 in all—are
placed. Entrance is to be had into the prison proper by means of a
round turning iron-barred cage in the main hallway of the central
building.

The cell-building halls are kept in a neat and clean condition; the
cells are in good sanitary condition and are kept in good order by the
inmates, many of whom are artistic in taste and paint and make many
fanciful designs as adornments of their small sleeping quarters. The
yard, limited in area by the shop, dining-hall, engine and hospital
buildings, is artistically laid out in grass-grown plats and flower
beds in season. Around the area of space on brick-laid pavements the
prisoners are permitted to walk in columns of two according to grade
for exercise during the afternoon after working hours, and Sabbath
forenoon prior to and after chapel services. At the four corners of the
penitentiary walls are stone turrets where armed guards are placed from
four o’clock a. m. to 9 p. m.

Upon West Virginia establishing a state government, Wheeling was
selected as the capital where the legislature met in session in 1863,
with Hon. Arthur I. Boreman as chief executive. The prison was located
in 1866 at Moundsville, Marshall Co., then a beautiful village a few
miles from the seat of government. The location, for drainage and
sanitary conditions, might have been better selected from one of the
many surroundings hills than in the midst of the village in the valley
on the banks of the Ohio river.

Moundsville has since the location of the penitentiary there, grown
into the eighth city in population of the state, and is now a
manufacturing and resident town possessing daily and weekly newspapers.
Modern improvements prevail, with water and electric light systems and
street-car lines connecting with Wheeling and adjoining suburbs. The
magnificent mound erected by the Mound Builders many years gone by for
the burial of their dead, to be seen near the penitentiary, is one of
the attractions to the thousands of persons who visit the locality.

Hon. G. S. McFadden, of Moundsville, was the first active and practical
warden of the penitentiary. With the means at hand he made many
praiseworthy improvements for the amelioration of the inmates during
his incumbency. The condition of the prisoners during the four years
past and now, is a vast improvement over the old system. Skilled and
humane prison managers for many years were wanting. The condition of
the inmates was at times deplorable in the extreme. The methods of
punishment in vogue were extremely severe, the work laborious, the
clothing of the zebra kind, the lock-step exacting, the supply and
kind of food indifferent and bad. The employment of the prisoners on
the state account or under contract was unprofitable, and expenses
for the prison’s maintenance piling upon the taxpayers, who made just
complaint. Loud demands were made by the people of Moundsville and
throughout the state, conversant with the deplorable condition of the
affairs of their penal institution, for a change.

After Governor Atkinson’s inauguration, March 4, 1897, he appointed
Colonel S. A. Hawk as warden of the penitentiary. He was at the time
of his appointment a well-known business man of Huntington, Cabell Co.
For a number of years he was also known as a popular employee of an
Ohio river steamboat running out of Huntington. He was at one time a
successful merchant, hotel-keeper, contractor, and during President
Harrison’s administration as President he was an official of the
Interior Department in charge of the public domain in Arizona Territory.

Prior to the incumbency of Warden Hawk the West Virginia penitentiary
had for years been running behind the legislative appropriation
many thousand dollars annually, and not much, if any, success was
made in the reformation of the prisoners. Altogether the prison was
in bad order when he took hold as warden, he not only introduced
reformatory treatment with respect to the prisoners, but he has made
the institution bring to the state an actual profit over and above all
expenses for maintenance. Warden Hawk took hold of the penitentiary
management May 1, 1897. He discovered that his predecessor’s method
of punishment was principally solitary confinement. Twenty-seven or
more prisoners were undergoing the punishment on bread and water, and
they presented a pitiable condition. Their labor was lost to the state;
their mental, moral, and physical health undermined; hope seemingly was
blasted, and they were strangers to God. The warden turned the key and
liberated these men and put them to work, which they gladly expressed a
willingness to do.

He adopted the new and advanced method of prison management in line
with up-to-date penalogists; viz., The grade system, plain clothing in
lieu of stripes, more and better food, first-class medical attendance,
every prisoner at work, more personal liberty and exercise granted; he
made himself approachable to those prisoners having a grievance, and
in so far as he could within the bounds of true discipline, rectified
them. Religious worship was fostered and encouraged; punishment for
willful infractions of the rules and regulations governing the prison,
sure and certain, by black-listing from special privileges, for a
period of thirty days or more; the lock-step, by carrying on the yard
an iron weight during working hours, and in extreme cases of fighting
and other reprehensible misconduct, corporal punishment with a leather
strap was inflicted, or by buck-and-gag. Other changes of a minor but
not less ameliorative nature were made conducive to the moral welfare
of the inmates.

To bring about these humane changes many and substantial improvements
were made in the way of buildings and additions without cost to the
taxpayers, for the prison was more than self-sustaining, and a handsome
sum of money was on hand for this purpose.


PRISON LIBRARY.

January 1, 1900, Warden S. A. Hawk completed the erection of a
two-story brick addition to the prison dining-hall. The second story
room, 40×40 feet, was dedicated by him to the use of a library and
school. The fixtures were placed in the room but there were only a
few mutilated books at hand to begin with. E. E. Byrum, President of
the Gospel Trumpet Publishing Company of Moundsville, hearing of the
situation, offered his gratuitous service to the warden to aid him to
build up the library to a respectable proportion. Upon the assurance
given him that there was no available appropriation to purchase books
for the library, Mr. Byrum called the attention of the members of
his company to this state of affairs, and upon their advice and with
their consent, a splendid lot of artistically bound religious and
other suitable books valued at $1,000 was placed at the disposal of
the warden for the use of the prison inmates. So grateful were the
prisoners, the warden, and prison employees at the generous gift that
it was

_Resolved_, That the prisoners of the West Virginia penitentiary,
through Warden S. A. Hawk, tender their grateful thanks to E. E. Byrum
and to the Gospel Trumpet Publishing Company, Moundsville, W. Va., for
the very welcome gift of books placed in the prison library for their
use.

This fine gift of standard literature, including 500 song-books, was a
nucleus for the building up of an excellent library, few equaling it in
the state.

Thousands of circular letters were mailed by the warden to the leading
citizens of West Virginia and leading publishing houses of the country
asking for donations of literature. The responses were generous—donors
sending from one book to cases containing hundreds of books. One year
after the opening of the library twelve thousand standard religious
and secular books and magazines were donated. It is true many of them
were second-hand and worn, except those received from the publishing
firms—such as the people of the state could afford to give.

The library represents to every inmate the warden’s desire that every
one of them should feel that an opportunity for newness of life to them
is open, and in such opportunity may be found an ample encouragement of
good purposes and well-meant efforts. Better life, better men, hence a
hope for the prevalence of improvement.

A night school from 5.30 to 7.30 p. m., for two hundred and more
illiterate white and colored inmates, ranging from seventeen to
seventy-two years of age, was begun in the library at its opening,
without intermission during every week-day of the year. The good result
has been more satisfactory in the teaching of spelling, reading,
arithmetic, geography, and writing than the most sanguine could have
anticipated. Every one of the illiterate prisoners at the end of
the year can read. The attendance of the pupils, thirty-two white
and forty colored, being voluntary on their part, alternate nights.
The prisoners are visited at their cells every Saturday evening by
assistant librarians (who are employed in shops during the day), with
slips in hand, and their order taken for whatever book or magazine they
may ask for. The magazines are securely bound, three in one volume,
minus the advertisements. The number of the cell is taken down with the
prisoner’s serial number. The literature is carefully selected by the
librarian and made ready for his assistants to place in the inmates’
cells, and each book is charged to the prisoner by his serial number,
to be kept for one week. If, however, the book is one that can not be
read during the regular period of time, upon application, a further
period of a week is allowed. The books issued the previous week are
collected and returned to the library, there to be carefully examined,
for intentional mutilation the culprit being black-listed and deprived
of the use of books, at the pleasure of the warden. At the first and
several issues thereafter illiterate and mischievous prisoners marked
their books, but by judicious use of the black-list and reprimand the
practice on the part of these culprits ceased, and they cheerfully
refrained from committing themselves again, and they are now most
careful of their literary treasures. For a period of seven months of
the year no reports for mutilation of books have been made.

The following are most in demand: Mothers’ Counsel to Their Sons,
Pilgrim’s Progress, Fox’s Book of Martyrs, The Kingdom of God, Divine
Healing of Soul and Body, Grace of Healing, Boy’s Companion, and
Letters for Our Girls—the last being in demand by the female inmates,
there being twenty-seven white and colored of them. Many books on
tobacco and its effects were also issued to the inmates above named.
The books are a part of the Gospel Trumpet Publishing Company’s
donation. From close observation of the readers of all this admirable
literature the good results are carefully and conscientiously given
as follows: Mothers’ Counsel to Their Sons is in constant and steady
demand from young men to the “manor-born” of West Virginia. They are
a unique, original, and reverent body of criminals. Far too many are
illiterate, possessed of high, lofty, and impulsive dispositions,
their very souls throbbing with vitality, their eyes beaming with
inspiration, doubtless inspired with the magnificent scenery of their
native and well-beloved state. Their hearts and minds seem to expand
with the thought ever present with them, “Mountaineers will ever
be free.” While restraint is irksome to them, they are, however,
sensitively susceptible to kind treatment. They love their mountain
homes and hearth-stones and cherish with fond remembrance the parents
at home, and they are keen to read literature that brings these close
to their prison home.

Pilgrim’s Progress is called for by older inmates from other states,
white and colored alike, and also those from foreign lands, some of
whom have enjoyed the benefit of early home religious training or have
been picked up during their wanderings around the world and about the
country. They seem to get much good from their reading of John Bunyan,
his temptations, trials, and triumphs. All of these men continue in
their demand for Gospel Trumpet literature until they have read all of
the different volumes of the donation. A marked and decided improvement
is noted in the good discipline and the attendance at religious
services of all of the readers of good literature and the warden and
guards are pleased with their exemplary behavior. The warden has found
it convenient to stop altogether the issue of tobacco to the inmates,
doubtless accounted for by readers of “Tobacco and Its Effects,” who
are now non-users of the weed. It is to be hoped that the contractors
do not issue to their employees as much tobacco as heretofore. May the
use of it grow less until in as well as out of prison its use may be
entirely eliminated.


RULES TO BE OBSERVED BY PRISONERS WHEN USING THE LIBRARY.

Rule 1st. Upon entering the library prisoners must promptly remove
their caps and go to their seats in a quiet manner.

Rule 2d. Chewing tobacco, smoking, or spitting on the floor is strictly
forbidden.

Rule 3d. Books, papers, or stationery required by any prisoner can be
had by raising the hand and asking the librarian or teacher.

Rule 4th. Undivided attention must be given to the teacher; his
instructions promptly and respectfully obeyed, and the whole time of
the prisoner who is learning must be devoted to study.

Rule 5th. Books, magazines, and papers will be issued for not longer
than one week. Care must be exercised not to mark, tear, or mutilate
them in any way.

Rule 6th. Should a violation of any of these rules result in a prisoner
being reported for punishment, he will be black-listed, and denied the
privilege of school or library.

Rule 7th. The privilege of the library will be given to prisoners of
exemplary record, where they will have free access to books, magazines,
and papers, after working hours.

  S. A. HAWK, Warden.


LITERATURE FOR CONVICTS.

The Greenbrier (W. Va.) Independent says: “A short time ago Judge
McWhorter of our town shipped to S. A. Hawk, warden of the state prison
at Moundsville, a lot of books, magazines, etc., donated by himself and
others. We are permitted to publish Mr. Hawk’s letter to the judge in
acknowledgement of the donation:

“‘Your fine donation of literature came to hand to-day (March 10), for
which please accept my sincere gratitude. I am gratified to inform
you that from donations received from the generous people of West
Virginia and some few publishers, I have about 10,000 volumes of books
and magazines—the latter securely bound and covered. The library is
indebted to the Wheeling Intelligencer and News for very many daily
exchanges. The library room is 40×40 feet, handsomely furnished and
fully equipped.

“‘I have an evening school of sixty pupils—thirty colored and thirty
white, boys and men—the hours being from 5 to 7.30 p. m. Their progress
is very satisfactory. Taking into consideration that I sent out my
appeal for literature January 20, 1900, I think that I have met with
unprecedented success, for which I am certainly grateful.

“‘I feel conscious that the new and more liberal system of discipline
inaugurated by me since my management of the prison, and the many
improvements made, is a duty I owe my charges and for the future
protection of society, because these men feel that the hand of every
man is not raised against them and that upon their release they will be
encouraged to make of themselves useful citizens.

“‘Assuring you that I completely appreciate your kindness, I am
sincerely yours,

  S. A. HAWK.’”


THE BIBLE CLASS.

Had been in an intermittent state of organization from 1890, with but
moderate success. Some two years ago (1899) the Gospel Trumpet people
took an active interest in the welfare of the Bible class, which meant
that henceforth renewed and intelligent effort was to be made for the
future. The class under the new order of arrangement and new infusion
of God’s Spirit greatly increased in membership in a short period of
time. To this class of earnest Christians the Gospel Trumpet people
and denominational ministers of Moundsville give their attention and
best effort in their respective turn, every Sabbath morning from 8 to
9 o’clock. The commendable progress the members of the class have made
in their work is to a large extent due to these ministers of God. Very
many remarkable conversions have been brought about, and baptism given
by the ordained ministers from the Gospel Trumpet office.


NOTABLE REFORMATIONS.

_Serial No. 2282_—A veteran inmate from Randolph Co., aged 56 years,
received at the prison in 1892 to serve his natural life for the crime
of murder, this being his second term for the same kind of crime. About
twelve years ago he was pardoned by the governor upon well established
grounds of mitigating circumstances connected with the alleged crime.

For the second term he has been an inmate for nine years. He is a
large man, six feet in height, with a good looking face and possessed
of a warm and tender heart. His prison record is exemplary, and he is
employed in the tailor shop, filling a responsible position. Four times
has the Bible class selected him as their class-leader, recognizing
his Biblical learning, industry, and signal ability at prayer and
exhortation. He says that during the years prior to the aid given to
the class at the hands of the Gospel Trumpet people, he was somewhat
lukewarm in his class work. However, with their hearty assistance and
material aid he took on a new spirit and inspiration for more and
better work for God. He is much encouraged by the many conversions made
and by the growth of the class. He canvassed for subscribers for very
many Gospel Trumpet literary works; of these and the Gospel Trumpet
paper, he is a constant reader.

_Serial No. 2320_—Received from Cabell Co. in 1892 to serve a life
sentence for murder, is a young man of fine education, culture, high
resolve and noble purpose, a scion of Christian family residents of
Ohio. The crime into which the unfortunate man was probably led appears
to have been a concocted scheme made up and he enticed to join in,
for the purpose of putting him out of the way in order to accomplish
certain designs his enemies had against his life and property to be
inherited by him. To make sure of their work the railroad officials and
detectives were put on the job, so, when he and his companions made the
attempt to stop and rob the railroad passenger train, they were fired
upon by a posse of armed guards, which they returned, killing one of
the passengers. He was seriously wounded, losing the use of his right
arm.

He was converted several years ago and baptized. His health has
long since been undermined by confinement and he is in a precarious
condition, but above all things else he is a true Christian and child
of God and entirely fit to be pardoned and restored to society, home,
and friends. He has served one year as leader of the Bible class, and
owing to his lovable disposition, learning, and industry he gave entire
satisfaction to his classmates.

_Serial No. 2547_—Received from Fayette County in 1894, for murder,
to serve his natural life in prison, age at the time 20 years, is a
notable example of complete reformation within the prison-walls. He
is a native of Virginia, raised to do hard work in the coal mines,
where he was without much, if any, advantage to enable him to obtain
an education. Possessed of natural abilities and doubtless awed by
the shadow of the gallows from which a loving sister saved him, and
the prison environments, he purposed to obey the prison rules by
industry at his employment and civility toward the prison officials
and his comrades. It seems also that early upon his entrance into the
penitentiary he resolved to be a godly man. He taught himself how to
read his Bible while in his cell at night. Attending the Bible class
he learned how to pray. He gave his heart to God one Sabbath day while
listening to a sermon. His classmates selected him as their leader and
he served so satisfactorily that during the end of Governor Atkinson’s
administration he was pardoned by and through the untiring effort and
devotion of the sister who had saved him years before from the gallows.
One and all rejoiced and prayed God that the Governor, at the end of
life’s journey may be rewarded for the mercy he granted even unto the
poorest and lowliest prisoner in the penitentiary.

_Serial No. 2504_—Received from Berkley County in 1894, for grand
larceny, to serve a term of twelve years, upon entrance to the
prison started in to make it unpleasant for the prison officials by
stubbornly refusing to work and by violent acts of misconduct. It was
found necessary to punish him severely several times. He was one of
the prisoners in solitary confinement when Warden Hawk took hold of
the prison. He was released with others, and at once taken in hand
by the warden for individual treatment. A good position was given him
in the laundry and other privileges granted to him as well as good
counsel given and amiably received. It was soon observed by the prison
officials that he was a constant attendant at the chapel Sabbath
services, then at a pathetic and prayerful invitation went forward one
Sabbath day and gave himself to the service of God and was baptized. He
was in charge of the Bible class for a while. He was recently released
by habeas corpus proceedings on the ground that having been committed
to the penitentiary on two sentences, one for four years and the
other for eight years, from different counties, the greater sentence
embraced also the lesser one, in that the date of sentence in each case
commenced from the day of sentence.

A close Biblical student and possessed of considerable natural ability,
power of prayer and exhortation, it is hoped and expected that he will
continue to be a worker in the Lord’s vineyard.

_Serial No. 3595_—Received from Monongahela Co. in 1898, to serve a
term of four years for grand larceny. Upon entering the prison he
became an active worker in the Bible class. He is an exemplary prisoner
and thought well of by the warden and prison officials. It is expected
that, upon his release, his experience in prison will make of him an
efficient Christian worker. Possessing some ability and ambition as a
hymn-writer, herewith is a sample:


“A BROTHER OF JESUS.”

    A brother of Jesus, a comrade to fight,
    A brother to conquer, and strive for the right,
    A brother in daring, a comrade indeed,
    A brother to venture, whatever the need.
    A brother in spirit, when dangers surround,
    A comrade in courage who stands his ground,
    A brother who’s faithful, loyal, and true,
    A comrade who fights, and fights his way through.
    A brother for heaven, who stands by the cross,
    A comrade obedient, whatever the cost,
    A brother who’s ready and willing to die,
    A comrade who will not his Savior deny.
    A brother on duty, by day and by night,
    A comrade who’s trusting in Jesus’ great might,
    A brother so Christlike, O Savior, I’ll be
    A comrade in purpose, sacred to thee.


DEGENERATES.

_Serial No. 4035_—Was received from Pocahontas County in 1898, to serve
two years for horse stealing. He claimed upon his entrance to the
prison to be a “preacher.” It is alleged by persons who know his life
and character that he is an old and experienced horsethief, who had
served many terms of imprisonment in the different penitentiaries of
the country, and was looked upon from a criminological point of view
as a moral degenerate of the first degree. While playing the role of
a “mountain evangelist” in the county from whence he was committed to
the penitentiary, he there applied his first and only calling, as a
horsethief of the first degree. Upon his introduction to the prison
he professed to be very religious, and stoutly maintained that he was
an innocent man much maligned and persecuted. He was made janitor of
the chapel, doubtless owing more to the fact that he was a cripple,
having only the use of his left hand, and a glib talker and not of use
elsewhere.

He soon ingratiated himself into the good graces of the visiting
ministers, who looked upon him more in pity than aught else, and they
extended to him charity which covers a multitude of sins. He did
active and good work, however. Upon his release from prison he made
loud professions of reformation and made pretense of going to serve
God and by so doing become a good citizen. It was, however, soon after
his release observed by persons interested in his welfare that he was
secretly treading the path of wickedness. Soon he was a fugitive from
justice with big rewards offered for his apprehension and conviction
for the larceny of many horses from the farmers of the state and
of Pennsylvania. Sheriffs of many counties were on the lookout to
apprehend him. Recently the sheriffs ran their quarry down and landed
him in the Mineral County jail and doubtless he will soon be returned
to his old familiar quarters, there to once more ruminate the error of
wrong-doing. It might well be said of him with Pope, “Why formed so
weak, so little, and so blind.” He has received another sentence of ten
years in state prison.


PATHETIC.

_Serial No. 3984_—Under sentence of death for the murder of his
brother-in-law, is an object of great pity. This man for the love
of his sixteen-year-old boy murdered a man, for which deed the law
demands his life. He and the man murdered were both wealthy farmers
at Terra Alta, Preston Co., West Virginia. Last November (1900) his
boy was arrested by the brother-in-law for breaking into the cellar
of his house and getting drunk on his cider. He had him indicted,
tried, convicted, and sentenced to the penitentiary for the term of
one year, which angered his father, who took a shot-gun and shot his
brother-in-law dead in his own barn in the presence of a hired man. The
father escaped and lived in the mountains a month, gave himself up,
pleaded guilty, and was sentenced to be hanged Feb. 15, 1901.

His neighbors, who were kindly disposed to the erring man, at once put
in circulation a petition to the Governor praying for a commutation of
sentence to life imprisonment. His wife signed a remonstrance against
granting the petition of her husband’s friends. However, the governor,
in order to enable the condemned man’s friends to present the petition
to the advisory board of pardons for their consideration, granted him
a respite until April 13. Upon his arrival in the penitentiary he was
permitted to see his wayward boy, and the scene between father and son
was truly pathetic.


HUMOROUS.

_Serial No. 3715_—An illiterate white boy from Calhoun County, to
serve two years for grand larceny for stealing a heifer, sensibly
availed himself of the privilege afforded by the warden to attend the
night school. He made remarkable progress in his studies, so that he
could read and write a legible hand. He was so elated with his success
that he stated before his release that he was glad he was sent to the
penitentiary for stealing the heifer to procure money to take his girl
to the county fair, for now he had a fair education and could get on
better in the world.


MEN EXECUTED FOR MURDER.

The West Virginia Legislature passed an act February, 1899, viz.: “The
sentence of death shall in every case be executed by hanging within the
walls of the penitentiary and not elsewhere. The officers of the court
imposing sentence may be present, and twelve respectable citizens, a
physician and surgeon, and such representatives of the press as the
warden may desire; and the condemned may by request have his counsel,
ministers of the gospel, and such relatives as the warden may deem
prudent.”

_Serial No. 3745_—Colored, of middle age, who had served a term in the
penitentiary for stealing, was brought to the prison in 1899, from
McDowell County, to suffer the penalty of death Oct. 10, 1899, for the
unprovoked murder of a “scarlet” negro woman. Upon his entrance into
the prison he asked for and was given a Bible, which he constantly
read during the time he awaited to be executed by mandate of the law.
Ministers of his race paid him frequent visits, anxious to aid him
in spiritual and temporal affairs. He professed sincere religious
belief and that upon confession of faith he would be saved, yet he did
not seem to accept with good grace the assistance offered him by the
negroes.

During his former imprisonment while he was employed to clean and
scrub the guard-room and the main-building hallways, he frequently
met the chaplain; so he made request to the warden that he be sent
for to pay him a visit. The chaplain responded at once and devoted
much of his time to giving religious consolation and words of good
cheer. He, however, constantly maintained that he was innocent of the
crime charged; that the negro with him at the time of the shooting was
responsible for the woman’s death, by means of a shot-gun. He doubtless
was possessed of a scheming mind, and hoped that he might by some means
escape the penalty for his crime. Many negro prisoners as well as white
ones deeply sympathized with him, for he was considered a “good fellow”
when they knew him in prison as one of their number.

A collection amounting to $50.00 was taken up from among the prisoners
to pay a lawyer to procure a copy of the record of his trial to enable
him to file an appeal to the Supreme Court for a new trial. The lawyer
received and acknowledged the receipt of the money, making in return
therefor full and profuse promises what he would do to save his life.
He took and spent it for liquor, became drunk on the money, and did not
turn a hand to save the life of his confiding client. The unfortunate
man, hearing of the reprehensible conduct of his attorney, and the
time near at hand for his execution, grew despondent and weak mentally
and physically. He was baptized, professed repentance, confessed he
murdered his mistress, and the night of his execution between the hours
of 12 a. m. and 1 p. m. it was found necessary to administer powerful
stimulants to brace him up for the trying ordeal. With zeal and courage
his spiritual advisor prayed, counseled, and assisted him to the
scaffold. His neck was broken by the fall and his death was painless.

_Serial No. 3746_—A splendid specimen of the young mulatto, possessed
of a fair education for one with the limited opportunities within his
reach, by occupation a coal miner. He was received into the prison from
McDowell County under sentence of death for the willful murder of a
sixteen-year-old negro boy, while he was in an intoxicated condition;
also to be executed Oct. 10, 1899. He asked for and was given a Bible.
He was a musician, playing the guitar with skill, and possessed of
a fine tenor voice he was fond of singing hymns, which he did with
pathos, rhyme, and music, to the delight of his hearers.

He stoutly maintained that his victim was not intentionally but
accidentally shot by him; that he accidentally fired his pistol into
the dwelling wherein the boy was domiciled out of his sight. Upon
learning that the boy was wounded, perhaps fatally, he procured a
doctor to whom he paid $50.00, all the money he had saved from his
earnings, to save his life. The boy proved to be wounded beyond the
hope of recovery and soon died. The chaplain also ministered to the
spiritual welfare of the prisoner and became much impressed with the
young man’s apparent religious sincerity and his plausible story of
innocence of murder. So much was he interested in him that he made
personal and strenuous efforts to save his life. The Governor was
appealed to, the Attorney General was called upon for assistance to
procure a copy of his trial record, and statements made by him were
investigated, and the whole matter submitted to the pardon board for
their consideration. After an exhaustive and painstaking consideration
of the facts submitted to them the pardon board concluded that he lied
and was in fact guilty, and should suffer the penalty for his crime.
The Governor, after the conclusion of the pardon board was made known
to him, paid the prison a visit. He called upon the doomed man in the
death-cell, and the latter made to the Governor a most eloquent and
pathetic plea to save his life. With tears streaming down his cheeks,
the Governor kindly said, “Would to God I could do so, my boy, but the
facts as presented to me are undeniable as to your absolute guilt.”

Now knowing that all hope for escape from the gallows was gone and
that he must die, he read his Bible, sang gospel hymns, and played his
guitar. He confessed that he was in fact guilty of the crime and was
now content to suffer death, as he believed he had made his peace with
God. He was baptized, and his demeanor to the scaffold from his cell
was admirable and brave. He firmly ascended the stairway leading to the
death-trap, stood over it without a tremor while his hands and legs
were strapped and the rope adjusted about his neck. When asked by the
warden if he had anything to say, he replied in a manly and firm voice,
“I have made my peace with God. I am guilty. The causes of my downfall
were whiskey and women. Jesus will take me and I am ready and willing
to die.”

_Serial No. 3772_—Colored, was received at the prison in 1900, from
Fayette County, to be executed for the willful murder of a prominent
negro saloon-keeper who refused to furnish him more liquor when he was
already drunk. He asked for a Bible, and when it was given to him he
seemed to be pleased, and constantly read it. His attorney, however,
was skilled in criminal law, and was an indefatigable worker. The
prisoner, an intelligent colored man, peaceable and quiet when sober,
believed that he would not have to suffer the penalty for his crime.
Strenuous efforts were made by his attorney to save his life. The
Governor and the board of pardon were respectively appealed to, but
the guilt of the man was so conclusive, and the murder so unprovoked,
that at all points his appeal for clemency was refused. He bravely and
uncomplainingly paid the penalty decreed by the law and professed his
belief in the saving power of Jesus.


UNDER SENTENCE OF DEATH.

_Serial No. 3944_—Committed from Wirt County, under sentence of death
for the brutal murder (by means of an ax) of his wife and step-son, a
child in years, the motive being to obtain money to be inherited by
them, is a constant reader of the Bible, and at all times is ready to
argue passages of the Scriptures with any one who will do so with him.
His attorneys secured for him a stay of execution pending an appeal to
the Supreme Court.

_Serial No. 3972_—Colored, was committed from Kanawha Co. in 1901, for
the brutal and unprovoked murder of a negro on account of some money
won by gambling. He is a large, middle-aged, gross-looking negro, who
has served a term in the penitentiary for stealing. From his life
record he appears to have been a vagabond, gambling, preying on the
people of his race for a living. He is possessed of some education, a
glib tongue, and appears to have made some friends among white people,
whom he says are his only friends and are the only persons who will
give him any assistance in his effort to escape the gallows. He was
to be executed March 22, 1901, but his attorney procured a stay of
execution until April 25, pending an appeal to the Supreme Court. He is
a constant reader of the Bible.


AN INNOCENT MAN.

_Serial No. 3789_—Committed to the prison in 1899 for twelve years,
from Jefferson County, for the alleged crime, in company with
other persons, of entering the Potomac river bridge toll-house at
Shepherdstown and robbing Richard Morgan and wife, whom they bound and
gagged, is an unfortunate victim of untoward circumstances. Evidence
has come to light, proved by affidavit, that he is innocent.


THE PRISON CHOIR.

The prison choir is made up of a number of good singers, white and
colored, the latter predominating. They are under the skill and
direction of Mr. Chas. E. Woodburn, a well-known business man of
Moundsville, who has devoted a number of years of his valuable time to
these boys as well as to the chapel services, and aided the warden in
providing amusement on holidays for the inmates.


APPEAL FOR A PAROLE LAW.

  West Virginia Penitentiary,
  Moundsville, Jan. 1, 1901.

Dear Sir: Gratified that the generous people of West Virginia have
in response to my letters of appeal to them dated Jan. 20, 1899, for
donations of literature enabled me to build up a library for my convict
charges to 12,000 volumes of books and magazines, I desire to further
trespass on their generosity by asking for your support to bring about
another measure of reform, viz., a parole law.

The parole law is in force in a number of up-to-date state
penitentiaries with remarkable success, bringing protection and good
results to society. It saves trouble to prosecuting attorneys and
criminal judges, and enables convicts to gain their liberty solely
through their individual efforts. For instance, by virtue of the
criminal statutes a convict may be sentenced for the minimum of one
year or the maximum of five years. The criminal judge upon conviction
of the prisoner on trial imposes an indefinite sentence. The convict
after the expiration of one year may become eligible to parole if his
record is exemplary. Two reliable citizens are required to become
surety for the convict’s employment and future good conduct, then he is
paroled.

Upon violation of any of the parole conditions, he is returned to
prison to serve the maximum sentence. If the convict is a man of
family, he is enabled to provide for them; and if he is a single man,
he has a chance to become a respected member of society and no longer a
menace thereto. Respectfully yours,

  S. A. HAWK.


THE WRITER’S LIFE.

That the reader may know and perhaps become interested in the writer
of this sketch of the West Virginia prison, he herewith respectfully
and modestly submits to them a sketch of his life. I was born in St.
Louis, Mo., in 1844. My parents, possessed of more than the ordinary
education the poor people of Ireland were enabled to receive, journeyed
across the American desert to California, having their troubles with
the Indians and their Mormon allies. My father hoped to strike a gold
mine and become rich, and in the new Eldorado build a home and surround
his wife and children—a girl and boy—with all the good things of earth
that money could buy. Soon after our arrival at San Francisco, the
cholera made its appearance, the plague having been brought to the
golden shores of California by emigrants traveling from the east by way
of Central America. My father was stricken with it and died. In the
Lone Mountain cemetery, of the metropolis of the Pacific coast, he has
lain buried for years. The remainder of the family escaped the dread
fifty-one disease. Mother was left to struggle alone in a strange land
and among strangers to provide for her children. Not afraid of work,
she did her duty to her children nobly, faithfully, and well. She now
lies buried beside my father in Lone Mountain cemetery, twenty years
gone by.

The war-bugle of the Rebellion rang in my ears and woke me to the
realization that I had a country to protect and to save. I enlisted
in a California regiment of cavalry and served three years with some
merit. Upon my discharge from the army I entered an Illinois college
to perfect my neglected education, and after graduation I located in
Kansas City, Mo. I began at newspaper work, and have continued in that
line of work to the present time, with occasional lapses from it to
engage in other and more lucrative employment. A soldier of the civil
war, having been wounded, injured, and having contracted disease in
the line of duty, I was prompted upon McKinley’s election as President
to apply for a pension. I went to Washington, D. C., to press my claim
in person with the Commissioner of Pensions. He turned me down after I
had some words with him relative to his delay in granting to me that
which was mine by legal right and title, expressed by the American
people through their representative in Congress assembled, and in
fulfillment of promises made to the men who saved the nation. Somewhat
addicted to the drink habit, I became drunk at my disappointment and
the next day I found to my surprise that I was in the police station
charged with breaking into and entering a small grocery in Washington
City, two miles from my place of dwelling. The alleged damage inflicted
was small, but Justice Clabaugh, who had recently been appointed from
Maryland, said to me that five years was little enough for the alleged
crime.

  Serial No. 378.

[Illustration: Penitentiary of the State of West Virginia]




LETTERS FROM PRISON OFFICIALS.


PRISON LIBRARY DESTROYED BY FIRE.

  Nebraska State Penitentiary.

  Lancaster, Neb., March 7, 1901.

Dear Sirs: Your consignment of eight books at hand, which is very much
appreciated. We are doubly unfortunate at the present time, as we have
just lost our entire library by fire. We realize too with you that
imprisonment is the turning-point for the better in some men’s lives,
as we see it exemplified here. At some future time we will send you for
publication the views of some of the above men who believe they have
been benefited by their prison experience.

Thanking you again for the books sent, and in advance for any books you
may see fit to send us, we remain, Yours respectfully,

  ——, Librarian.


  Clinton Prison.
  Dannemora, N. Y., March 8, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Publishing Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gentlemen: The books and tracts so kindly forwarded by you for the
use of the prisoners in this prison have been received, and the note
enclosed to the warden handed me for reply. Having charge of all
literary material that comes into the prison, I take great pleasure
in acknowledging receipt of same; and would extend to you my personal
thanks, as also the gratitude of those whom this material was designed
to benefit.

I am glad that the spirit of the “inasmuch” as inculcated by the
Lord Jesus, in relation to those who are in prison, is occasionally
manifested, and that the rush and friction of wordliness does not
wholly shut out from view the moral and religious needs of the “men
behind the bars.” The good people to whom you refer in your letter,
who are endeavoring to supply our prisons with good and wholesome
literature, are entitled to great credit for their efforts in this
direction, in these last days of the dispensation. May the blessings of
our Divine Master be with them in their good work. Sincerely yours,

  ——, Chaplain.


  Iowa State Penitentiary.
  Fort Madison, Iowa, March 17, 1901.

  The Gospel Trumpet Publishing Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gentlemen: The books sent by you to the penitentiary have been
received, and will be placed in the hands of the men. Thanking you for
the same, I am, Sincerely yours,

  ——, Chaplain.


  Onondaga County Penitentiary.
  Syracuse, N. Y., Jan. 17, 1901.

Dear Sirs: Received three packages of books from Gospel Trumpet
Publishing Co., Moundsville, W. Va., for the benefit of the convicts
in our institution. Hope the gift is accompanied by the prayers of all
concerned in the donation. Yours truly,

  ——, Chaplain.


  Kansas State Prison.
  Lansing, Kans., March 6, 1901.

  The Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gentlemen: We have received to-day your donation of books to this
prison. We assure you that this gift of books is highly appreciated by
us, and will be of great benefit to the inmates of this institution. We
wish to thank you and others who are placing these books in the prisons
of this country. Thank you for donations of the “Gospel Trumpet” to
prisoners each week. Yours truly,

  ——, Chaplain.


BOOKS WANTED FOR FEMALE PRISONERS.

  Penitentiary at Anamosa.
  Anamosa, Ia., March 6, 1901.

  The Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

We received this day one copy each of “The Kingdom of God,” “The Better
Testament,” “Mothers’ Counsel to Their Sons,” “Divine Healing,”
“The Secret of Salvation” (English and German editions), “Songs of
the Evening Light,” a Bagster’s Teachers’ Bible. I find we have now
seven copies of the book “The Secret of Salvation” in our library.
We are obliged for copies of these and shall hope to inclose them in
our revised catalogue which we hope soon to publish. You perhaps are
not aware that we have a female department to the prison, but seeing
“Letters of Love and Counsel for Our Girls” listed, leads me to refer
to this fact. Your letter to the inmates is appreciated. Yours truly,

  ——, Acting Chaplain.


  New Jersey State Prison.
  Trenton, March 5, 1901.

  E. E. Byrum.

Dear Sir: The package of books and tracts which you sent for the
benefit of the prisoners in our state prison came duly to hand, and
the warden desires me to thank you for your timely gift. I will see
that the books and tracts are judiciously distributed, so that good
under the divine blessing may come through the reading of such good
literature.... I will be glad to have you send religious reading matter
for the prisoners, knowing that with His blessing much good can and
will be accomplished by such a course. One of the factors leading to
a life of crime has been the character of reading allowed in the
home. Parents, ignorant or indifferent, have permitted their boys
to devour dime novels and kindred literature until their minds have
become saturated with evil. Now the antidote is good reading for the
poor victims of parental neglect such as you propose to furnish....
Thanking you for the interest you have taken in the welfare of those
incarcerated here, and praying the blessing of the Great Head of the
church upon you, I am, Yours truly,

  ——, Chaplain.


MORE GOOD BOOKS DESIRED.

  Louisiana Penitentiary.
  Baton Rouge, La., March 13, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.

My Dear Friends: Please allow me to thank you in behalf of the
prisoners for the six books and Bibles you so kindly sent recently. We
all appreciate the kind interest you take in us in sending the Gospel
Trumpet and sincerely trust you will continue sending same, as we all
very eagerly look forward to receiving it. If you have any more good
books to spare we will be very glad to receive them, as we all enjoy
reading very much. Again sincerely thanking you for past favors. Very
respectfully,

  ——, Librarian.


  Allegheny Penitentiary.
  Allegheny, Pa., March 20, 1901.

Dear Sir: I feel very glad that you are now and have been for some time
so deeply interested in an uplift of the moral forces in prisons, and
that your laudable work may result in much good, is my sincere desire.
We have no prison paper published here to send you. We have a school
six hours every day except Sunday for the illiterate, a Bible and
hymn-book for each man that will use them, a library of 8,500 volumes,
hundreds of daily and weekly papers and magazines, Moody’s books and
tracts, etc., by which we are striving to give light and spiritual help
to the prisoners. Sincerely,

  ——, Chaplain.


  Connecticut State Prison.
  Wethersfield, Conn., March 6, 1901.

  The Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gentlemen: The eight books sent this institution, including a Bagster
Bible and song-book, came duly to hand. The Bible has been given a
life prisoner, the song-book went to the choir, and the other books
were turned over to the chaplain—who is the librarian—to be placed in
general circulation. Respectfully yours,

  ——, Warden.


  Idaho State Penitentiary.
  Boise City, Idaho, March 8, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gentlemen: Yours of recent date enclosing letter to prisoners and
referring to printed matter sent under separate cover at hand. The
letter referred to shall be placed in a conspicuous place for review
by the inmates of our institution. The reading matter will also be
placed at their disposal. Be assured that this effort on the part of
the “friend” who has paid for them is appreciated by the present Idaho
Prison management. Yours sincerely,

  ——, Warden.


  Georgia State Prison Farms.
  Statefarm, Ga., March 5, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

My Dear Sir: Your books received, and the Bible which is a very nice
one. The song-book was sent to the female congregation for use by them.
We have eighty-eight women there, some of them with good voices, and
they sing well. We hope the words may prove a savor of life to them.
The other books were sent to the male department, where we have one
hundred and forty men and boys. We hope they too will prove a blessing,
for the thing most important for a convict is salvation. I was pleased
with the very excellent quality of books sent.

  ——, Supt.


LETTER FROM A SHERIFF.

  Wheaton, Ill., April 23, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.

Dear Sirs: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of a package of books and
tracts sent me for the use of prisoners under my charge. Please accept
my thanks for same. I heartily commend your efforts and work. Very
truly yours,

  ——, Sheriff.


PRISON CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOR SOCIETY.

  Jackson, Mich., March 22, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gentlemen: The above named society desire you to know of their grateful
appreciation for the donation of several valuable books. They comprise
a splendid addition to our C. E. S. Library, which is eagerly read by
the members and others. Thanking you for remembering us, I remain,
Sincerely yours,

  6890, Corresponding Secretary.


HELP SUPPLY THE PRISONERS.

  Maine State Prison.
  Thornston, Maine, April 30, 1901.

Sirs: Your letter to the warden has been passed on to me. We are
pleased to receive religious reading to be distributed to the convicts
in this prison. I have an arrangement with many Christian friends who
aid, so I am able to furnish some Christian book or paper to each
convict each week. Yours in the work of saving the fallen,

  ——, Chaplain.


  Sing Sing Prison.
  Sing Sing, N. Y., March 7, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Dear Sirs: The books you sent for use of the prisoners in this prison
have been received, and I thank you for the same. They have been placed
in the library. It is always a pleasure to know that we are in the
thoughts and consciences of the people on the great outside world....
Thanking you for your gift and wishing you success in your efforts to
lift up fallen humanity, I remain, Fraternally yours,

  ——, Chaplain and Librarian.


PRISON LITERATURE APPRECIATED.

  Alva, Woods Co., Okla., Dec. 20, 1900.

Dear Sirs: Yours along with the books you sent were received last week
and, as directed, the library was placed within the steel cage, where
the prisoners could have free access to it. We would love to say a word
of encouragement to the good people who are interesting themselves in
behalf of the poor unfortunates behind iron bars, but we have not the
command of language to express our admiration of this most commendable
and noble work. No one can tell the good that may result from these
silent companions, read by the poor unfortunates when shut in from the
world. While we have never hoped to start a reform in prison life,
we have often asked for more Christian interest in behalf of the
prisoners. Accept our humble thanks for this most generous gift.

  ——, Former Jailer.


  California State Prison.
  Represa, Sacramento Co., Cal., Feb. 13, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gentlemen: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of eight books for prison
library. We are very grateful to receive anything in this line, and any
sent will be thankfully received. Respectfully,

  ——, General Overseer.


FROM A JAILER.

  Guthrie, Logan Co., Okla., June 14, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Publishing Co.:

I am glad to address you with a few lines to inform you that I received
a package of books and tracts for the prisoners in my charge. The same
have been handed them to read. I am glad to say that they enjoy reading
them very much. I take an interest in reading them myself and think
they are the best books and papers I ever read, and a great gift to
the prisoners. They seem to condemn them of the crimes that they have
committed. I am glad to say that the gospel can not be preached plainer
than your books and papers preach it. I learn through your books and
papers what it takes to constitute the church of God. The prisoners of
this jail send their many thanks for the literature sent them.

  ——, Turnkey.


  California Prison.
  San Quentin, Cal., March 8, 1901.

  Editor Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.

Dear Sir: I beg to acknowledge receipt of your kind favor of books and
one fine Bible for the prisoners. I have added the books to the library
and presented the Bible to one of the most worthy and appreciative of
the prisoners, whose letter I have enclosed. I believe our prisoners
have been much helped by the distribution of your excellent religious
literature and kindly gifts. I shall be pleased to receive any further
contributions in this direction. Thanking you in the name of the
prisoners, I am, Yours,

  ——, Chaplain.


  North Dakota State Penitentiary.
  Bismarck, N. D., April 11, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Publishing Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gents: I have to acknowledge receipt of yours of March 21st and owe
you an apology for not giving you an earlier answer to same. You are
doing a good work which is, I believe, appreciated by the unfortunates
whom you are seeking to benefit, as well as by those who have them
in charge. This is a small institution; we have at this date one
hundred and fifteen inmates, all men. The moral conditions are, I
believe, fairly good in the institution but there is great chance for
improvement and I will be grateful for anything you may be able to do
to assist in that direction, and trust that I may be able later on to
assist you in the noble work in which you are engaged. Respectfully,

  ——, Warden.


BOOKS USED UNTIL WORN OUT.

  Kentucky Penitentiary.
  Frankfort, Ky., Feb. 8, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

We have received from your publishing house a nice package of good
books. I take this opportunity to acknowledge receipt of same, and to
thank you kindly for this generous donation. The books are turned
into the hands of the prisoners, who take them eagerly, and are very
grateful for them. They are passed from one to another until they
are literally worn out. Allow me to say in this connection, that the
problem of criminology in this country must be solved by other means
than the punitive, and retributive idea. We have been more than a
century trying every plan that man can devise to check and cure this
growing curse. We must turn to the means provided by God Almighty. The
gospel of Jesus Christ is the only and true remedy. Disseminating good
literature, and instructing in the ways of life, is a step in the right
direction. I have made a study of the subjects under my charge, for
nearly three years, and find that the man who fails to accept Jesus,
and have his soul washed in his blood, in most cases leaves this place
still a criminal. May God help us to lead them into the light. Many
blessings upon you for your act of mercy. Very truly, your brother and
co-worker,

  ——, Chaplain.


  Michigan State Prison.
  Jackson, Mich., March 11, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Gentlemen: We are in receipt of the very excellent collection of books
you sent us for the use of the men in our institution. Please accept
our grateful thanks for the same, and be assured they will be eagerly
read and highly prized by the men. Too much can not be said of the
beneficial influence of good books in the prison. Men will carefully
read books in here that they would not look at outside. And then too
they have time to digest what they read. Again thanking you for your
kind remembrance of us, I beg leave to remain, Yours truly,

  ——, Chaplain.


  Dover, Del., Aug. 6, 1900.

I received the tracts that you sent, and distributed them among the
prisoners. They seem to enjoy them more than anything they have ever
had in the way of reading. I shall be more than glad to distribute all
such reading as that proves to be. Yours respectfully,

  ——, Warden of the Kent County Prison.




TESTIMONIES OF CONVICTS.


FELLOW PRISONERS, TAKE COURAGE.

  Moundsville, W. Va.

Through the kindness of the warden I am permitted to present a small
sketch of my prison life. I am glad to avail myself of the opportunity
of relating my experience in the earnest hope that some one as
unfortunate as myself may be benefited thereby. That this is written
within prison-walls will, I feel, prove none the less interesting.
The first night I spent in prison will never be forgotten. When the
cell-doors clanged, closing in upon me, I felt my very heart sink
within me. Then with a contrite heart I looked to Jesus, and spent the
night in prayer. Oh, what a comfort he has been to me! I then and there
made up my mind to follow in his footsteps, and devote my life to him.

With a change of heart, Christ has ever been with and bountifully
blessed me. I meet with great kindness from Christian people, and every
consideration from our noble warden and his officers. Because I am in
prison I need not be useless nor unhappy. I accept my situation as of
divine appointment, and will try to be contented with it. Lamenting
over the past will do no good, for I can not recall or change it.
Complaining of the present will not mend but make myself and others
wretched. Anxiety about the future will not make it any better. My
heavenly Father has permitted things to be just as they are, and I know
he loves me. I will therefore leave all to him. No rebellion shall be
cherished in my heart, and no murmur shall escape my lips. My Savior
has promised that his grace shall be sufficient for me. He will never
leave me, but be a present help in time of need. Trusting in him and
committing all to my loving Father’s care, I will do what I can. I
will make the place where my lot is cast as bright and cheerful as
possible, and work and wait with patience till I am permitted to go to
my heavenly home.

I am indebted to many of my Christian friends, to all of whom I extend
my heartfelt thanks for many acts of kindness, of which one is in
supplying me with a fine Teachers’ Bible and other good religious
reading matter. My Bible has been to me a constant source of pleasure,
it has dispersed the dark cloud of sorrow and let in the sunlight of
God’s love. There was a time when I believed every earthly friend had
forsaken me, and that I was only known by a number—the number on the
books of a prison. In a cell, yea, shut away from the full light of
day, shut away from man, I was lonely, friendless, forgotten—a boy who
was once free as heaven’s sunshine, free as the birds whose songs I
loved to hear. I remembered my home, my mother, the good-night kisses,
the lilacs, the roses, the orchard, the swing, the schoolhouse, and the
playmates. Then I thought of that beautiful and pathetic hymn, “Oh,
where is my wandering boy to-night?” and I resolved that I would flee
to the One whom God had appointed to bring forth the prisoner from the
prison-house of sin. My brothers, you are not forgotten. If mother is
alive, she is praying for you, and the God to whom she prays loves
you. “Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love”; “and, lo, I
am with you always.” He has all the angels of heaven working to help
fallen humanity to be saved from sin. “Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation?”—Heb. 1:14. And I am glad that I can testify to the facts,
that behind prison-walls, in the dark shadows of a prison-cell, are
sons and daughters of God, heirs of God, joint-heirs with Christ, heirs
of salvation, and to these heirs of salvation angels are sent forth to
minister. The angel in your cell waits, brother. Kneel and pray. “If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.”—1 Jno. 1:9.

Can I, can you, live a Christian life in bondage? My answer is in the
affirmative. It has been tested and proved beyond a doubt. I will
recall the incident of Joseph. When he was a mere boy he was sold by
his brethren and cast into bondage. He resisted temptation, even when
he knew that in so doing he was taking just so many steps toward the
dungeon. Gen. 39:7-20. In adversity, as well as in prosperity, he gave
all honor to God. Gen. 41:16. He forgave his brethren when most men
would have been tempted to punish them. Gen. 50:15-21. We can learn
from Joseph’s prison life a remarkable lesson. That God was with him in
all things was unmistakably true. He was blessed and elevated to noble
positions. This honor he gained by his uprightness in his daily walk
before God. Gen. 39:21-23; Acts 7:9. God used him as an instrument to
unfold his plans. Gen. 45:5-8; 50:20; Acts 7:9-14. If Joseph, a mere
boy, could walk uprightly before God and receive a blessing in prison,
I or any one else can do the same by the grace of God, and by his grace
I will. And again, Peter, the apostle of Jesus Christ, was imprisoned
by Herod and was delivered by an angel through the prayer of the
church, yet he could not realize that he was released from his bonds
and imprisonment, but thought that it was a vision. Acts 12:4-9. Paul
and Silas suffered bonds of imprisonment, and stripes of persecution
for proclaiming the gospel of Christ, and during all their persecution
sang songs of praise and lifted their voices in prayer to the Lord.
Acts 16:22-26. If all of these men could offer so much praise to God
under such trying circumstances, I or any one else can do the same, but
only through his grace. By his grace I will. When we fully submit our
minds to God’s mind and plans, then God will teach us the sweet lesson
that “all things work together for good to them that love God.”—Rom.
8:28. Trust him and open your heart to him and you will experience this
peace which he gives to his followers, a peace such as the world can
neither give nor take away.

In conclusion I must say, if the dear readers could but hear the
pleading, fervent prayers and the touching testimonies of these
unfortunates, they would place a higher estimate on the prisoner, and
by word and act help him rise, as it were, above his surroundings. The
prisoners are given to understand by our warden that the prayer-meeting
services are theirs, and let me say there are about fifty of the boys
here who try to make the best of it, and in no single instance have
they violated the privilege granted to them during this service. I
consider it a privilege to stand up for God, even within the confining
bars of a penitentiary. My brother prisoner, the Master is calling
for you. Think of it, whosoever believeth on God’s only Son, a free
and a full salvation shall he have, for God is both willing and able
to save. “What must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.”—Acts 16:30. Salvation is
in the name of Jesus; “neither is there salvation in any other: for
there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must
be saved.”—Acts 4:12. “Choose you this day whom ye will serve.”—Josh.
24:15. May God bless and uplift the fallen everywhere.

  Serial No. 2282.


SAVED BEHIND PRISON-BARS.

  Washington Co. Jail, Potasi, Mo., Sept. 23, 1900.

I was a very wicked man when I was put in here, but by reading books
and tracts sent me I soon realized my condition, and oh, how I repented
of my many sins and called on God for mercy! Now I am so happy to tell
you that he freely forgave me all. Praise his dear name! Although I
have been in here long time my hours have been sweet since I found
Jesus. I expect to leave here in a few days for the state prison at
Jefferson City, but oh, I have the sweet promise: “I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee.” I have promised God that the rest of my days
shall be spent for him who has done so much for me. I expect to work
for God all I can while in the penitentiary, distributing papers and
books that are sent to me for that purpose. Dear ones, pray that God
may ever use me.

  J. H. R.


FROM A CONDEMNED PRISONER.

  Santa Fe, New Mexico.

Through the kindness of a lady in California a few copies of your
paper, the Gospel Trumpet, have found their way into this prison (Santa
Fe, New Mexico). Each copy has been met with a hearty welcome, and
well read. This prison has about 230 men behind its walls. About one
hundred of these men can read the English language, and are in need of
the true gospel. If any of God’s children who read this feel that they
would like to send a few copies of the Trumpet, or tracts, or any other
spiritual literature to this prison, the writer will take pleasure in
distributing the same.

I am happy to say that I feel the effects of the many earnest prayers
that are rising daily in my behalf. I am a condemned man and have been
lying under a death sentence for over thirteen months. My case will be
disposed of in August, and I need the prayers of all God’s dear people.
Brothers and sisters, pray for me. I have many friends and loved ones
praying that it may be God’s will to give me my liberty next spring.
Will every one who may read this join us in this prayer, and always
close with “God’s will be done.” Dear ones, I am only in one of God’s
schools, and his great Spirit gives me strength to rejoice with all my
sad trouble. I was placed in this dungeon April 4, 1899, and have not
seen a star since. Oh, I know they would look beautiful! The sun never
reaches my little palace; but I am happy to say, “There is sunshine in
my soul to-day.” Have not been sick an hour since here. All the praise
to my dear Savior. I am expecting to get my case reversed in August, am
putting my trust in higher power than man. “If God be for us, who can
be against us?”—Rom. 8:31. I know that I have the prayers and sympathy
of every one that loves Jesus Christ and his cause, and when my case
is decided I will let you all know the verdict through the Trumpet. My
enemies are many, and I will ask you all to remember them daily, in
your prayers. I love their souls, and my earnest prayer is that I may
meet them all in heaven. Reader, meet me at Jesus’ feet.

  W. B. H., Box 426.


  Territorial Prison of Arizona.
  Yuma, Ariz., Nov. 17, 1900.

Dear Sirs: Our honorable superintendent gave me your letter
accompanying some books and tracts you sent to the prisoners in the
Territorial Prison at Yuma, Arizona, a few days ago. As it happens to
be my misfortune to be one of the number incarcerated in this place, I
take pleasure in writing you and telling my experience of what Jesus
can do for a man behind the prison-walls. Like many others behind the
prison-bars, no doubt, I enjoyed the blessing of being brought up in
a Christian community, but had never been brought to the realization
of the fact that I needed the protection of a loving Savior to guide
me through this life, and like the prodigal son I thought I could take
care of myself. But like so many hundreds of others that take no heed
to their earlier training, fell into bad company, which finally led to
the cause of my misfortune that placed me behind the prison-walls.

At first the thought of being in prison, and loved ones at home, almost
drove me wild. The days were too long, the nights too long; I could not
content myself with reading, and could scarcely work. I thought I was
the most miserable man on earth, and almost wished I could die. Finally
I concluded to try to read the Bible. I had scarcely looked in a Bible
for nine years, much less read a single chapter. So I secured a Bible
and began at the first chapter of Genesis, and read a few chapters at
leisure hours. I would mark the place where I left off and commence
there when I had another opportunity to read. The more I read the more
interesting it became; so I finally read it through. By the time I
read it through I had become so interested I would take the Bible to
the cell with me at night and read till the lights were turned out,
and I concluded to read it through again and take more time in reading
and try to get a better understanding of it. Before I got through the
second time I was convicted by the Spirit of God. I realized that I was
not only a convict, but a sinner. I accepted Christ as my Savior, and
have been trying to serve him ever since.

It has made a new man of me. The days and nights are now not too long,
and I can work as though I were drawing a salary. The Bible is the
most precious book in the world to me, and the longer I serve Christ
the more I am determined to serve him the remainder of my life. My
prayer is that every man behind the prison-bars may accept Christ as
their Savior, while in prison; for if they wait until they get out, the
temptations are too great and the chances are against them. My advice
to my fellow convicts is to read the Bible; if it is not interesting
at first it will become interesting; it will broaden your minds, it
will make better men and women of you, it will help you to bear your
burdens, and may be the means of saving your souls.

I thank you for the books and tracts, and assure you they will be read
and appreciated by quite a number of the men here, and trust God will
bless you in your efforts to lead fallen men to the Savior.

  R. C.


  Jackson, Mo., April 4, 1900.

We, the prisoners of Jackson, Missouri, thank you for sending us those
good papers. We would to God we were able to express our gratitude
for the Gospel Trumpet and to you for your great desire to help us to
be better men. I wish we had thousands of such men and women as you
are. I do wish that every poor soul in this world could get a Gospel
Trumpet and read and see the great light it gives to any one trying to
serve the true God. I desire your faithful prayers to help me bear the
cross, and also wish the prayers of all your brothers and friends that
I may be a better man. Pray God to deliver me from my enemies and out
of this prison. I have a dear wife and six little children and want to
return home to them. I will leave here to-morrow for Jefferson City Mo.
prison, and hope to hear from you again. May God help you to help every
poor soul.

  L. L. B.


  Charleston, Mo., April 18, 1900.

In reply to your letter of April 16, it was kindly received by the
prisoners in jail, and we were very thankful to you for those papers
you sent. All the boys send their many thanks. There are nine here and
expect to be here for quite a while, and would like very much if you
only had some one come here and talk to us and bring us papers. Hoping
to hear from you again and receive some more papers. Many thanks from
all the prisoners in jail.

  ——


  Greenville, Mo., March 27, 1900.

Yours of the 26th received with roll of papers. Must say we were
glad to get them. We are glad to have plenty at all times. As may be
expected, there are some in this prison who need something to encourage
them, and should you deem it expedient you may send us some papers,
such as you may think best to send. I for one need reformation and will
be pleased to have your assistance in trying to follow the steps of the
Savior. Your well wisher.


  Jefferson City, Mo., April 10, 1900.

We, the prisoners of Cole County Jail, received your kind letter and
papers this morning. We are very thankful to you for your good wishes
and appreciate your interest in us to help us to be better men. It is
a matter to be deplored that in the great state of Mo. there are so few
who would put out the hand of mercy to fallen humanity. Your papers
will always be welcome, and we hope they will do the good you intend.
With sincere good wishes we subscribe ourselves

  Prisoners of Cole County Jail.

P. S. A Bible and gospel hymn-book would be very much appreciated.


  Nevada, Mo., April 19, 1900.

It is with pleasure I answer your most kind and welcome letter received
the 18th with joy and delight. There are ten men in this jail and each
sends his thanks to you for your kindness. Nearly every word in the
papers has been read. I am not a Christian, but I ofttimes wish I could
be converted, for the Christians seem to be so happy, and I cherish a
hope that I may soon get out of darkness into light. I was in here four
months without any Christian influence or Christian papers to read, and
my mind seemed to wander away to some unknown realm of darkness until
the last night of March, when the door opened and we were presented
with some little books, and on the first day of April we received
another roll and also some papers which were sent to us by the good
Christian ladies of Nevada, and you do not know how it brightened my
hopes and prospects. It made me think that I had some friends to speak
a word of encouragement to me. We like the Gospel Trumpet. It is a
splendid paper for any one to read, and I hope I may have the pleasure
of reading more of them. Your true friend,

  ——.


  Centerville, Ala., Sept. 9, 1900.

I will answer your letter. I was glad to get your books; they gave me
much light. I have been in jail a long time and you are the first one
that has ever sent me anything to read. I would like to have some more
books to read. Yours,

  J. D. W.


  Will County Jail, Joliet, Ill., April 7, 1900.

We, the inmates of this institution, surely appreciate the
consideration which you have taken in us. And as the County of Will
does not furnish a library we the inmates will be pleased to receive
any literature which you have to spare.

  Inmates.


  Georgetown, Del., Aug. 7, 1900.

We received those little books and tracts, and we prisoners were very
glad to receive them, although we are all sinners in this place. There
are nineteen of us at present—seven white men and twelve colored men.
We are treated very kindly by the keepers. Please send us more books.

  From the Prisoners.


  Hartford, Conn., Aug. 12, 1900.

We have to again thank you for sending us books, tracts, etc. We fully
appreciate the motives with which these books are sent, and are sure
that they will bear fruit in due season. The books, etc., are very
interesting and are looked forward to with great pleasure. We trust
that everybody who reads them will be benefited by their teachings. And
when we are permitted to go forth into the world again, we trust we may
be able to render assistance to some needy brother or sister who is
seeking to find Jesus. May God bless you in your good work. In behalf
of the prisoners in Hartford Jail. I beg to remain yours sincerely,

  J. W. C.


  Jefferson City, Mo., Aug. 22, 1900.

I will drop you a few lines in answer to yours, which I received, and
also a package of books which I was also glad to receive, and pleased
to hear from you. I am still trusting in God, and will trust in him
until death. There are five boys in here beside myself, who are reading
those books that you sent me. They think them good. It does me good to
know they like them. I am going to live for God the rest of my days,
and keep out of trouble. I have sadly repented of this, and I know God
forgives me. I have promised my God that I will serve him the rest of
my days, and I am going to keep it by the help of God. Many thanks for
those books. From your saved brother,

  H. T. B.


FROM A CALIFORNIA PRISONER.

  San Quentin, Cal., March 8, 1901.

  Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

My Dear Friends: Your very kind letter addressed to the prisoners has
been given to me by the chaplain to answer. It is a great consolation
to the prisoners to know that there are good people in the world who
sympathize with the unfortunate. The Gospel Trumpet has been eagerly
sought after and read with interest and benefit by many of the boys.
It is casting bread upon the waters of life. We frequently have
it thrown in our faces—those who are trying to live the Christian
life—that state’s prison is a poor place to come to get religion. Now
I admit that this is true, also that it is a poor place to come to
for any purpose provided that we are obliged to come as so many of us
are; however, I thank God that I have found the way to a better life
notwithstanding I am in state’s prison. It is better to find Christ
in prison than not to find him at all. If we repent and ask Christ to
forgive us, he is willing and able to forgive us in prison as well as
anywhere else, and to cleanse us from all sin. I thank God that I can
report victory through grace. Christ is able to save me and keep me in
prison. The farther along, the brighter the way grows. Salvation has
made such a radical change in my life that I can scarcely recognize my
former self. God has so strengthened my faith as to banish all doubts
and fears and filled me with humble, peaceful love. Thank God for this
glorious change. I am indeed in full possession of a new nature; old
things have passed away; behold, all things are become new. I received
from our chaplain the elegant Bible which you sent. I assure you that
I appreciate it very much and will keep it as a great treasure while I
live. Those other books are highly appreciated. Surely it is casting
your bread upon the waters of life. Christ said he that giveth unto the
least of God’s creatures a cup of cold water will receive his reward.
Your gift is a well of water flowing over, and God will reward you in
proportion. Your brother in Christ,

  ——, Serial Number 1055.


PAPERS AND BOOKS SOLICITED.

  Walla Walla, Washington, Feb. 19, 1901.

  Mr. E. E. Byrum,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

My Dear Sir: A fellow inmate of this, the Washington State
Penitentiary, has been kind enough, on two or three occasions, to
permit me a perusal of your most excellent publication, the Gospel
Trumpet. I feel certain that I have been benefited through the
privilege, as within a sinful environment, such as obtained here,
one needs the wholesome and uplifting encouragement that is breathed
through the columns of your magazine. In one of your issues I note
that you have a fund set aside the proceeds of which are devoted to
furnishing Christian literature to those whose lack of means precludes
them from otherwise obtaining it. Had I the money I would gladly remit
for a supply, but isolated as I am I am unable to provide it, and
therefore, if I may presume upon your charity, I assure you that I
shall feel truly grateful for any remembrance which your goodness may
prompt you to tender. Thanking you in advance for a response, I remain,
Yours very truly,

  ——, Prisoner.


FROM A LIFE PRISONER.

  Nevada State Prison.
  Carson City, Nev., April 18, 1901.

  The Gospel Trumpet Pub. Co.,
  Moundsville, W. Va.

Dear Friends: Your kind letter and the books were duly received, for
which please accept my thanks. I read your letter to the men one
Sunday morning just at the opening of service. The effect of its
kindly expressions upon the men in general I am unable to state,
but personally I wish to thank you. I have read your books and like
them. I like the plain speaking which I find there, in denouncing this
makebelieve Christianity. Above all men, the prisoner is quick to see
the non-practice of the teachings of Jesus by his professed followers,
and seeing it, they conclude it is all pretense. I speak of those who
read the Bible. Consequently very few make any effort to lead a true
life, and care very little for Christian reading. Of course they are
wrong in that respect, as they have been in many others, but being
blind they are unable to see, I know, and so does any one who thinks
or reads, that our penal systems are of the most unChristlike nature
possible, breathing more of the spirit of hell than of the spirit that
lifts heavenward. Why our people will continue in this spirit I know
not. Perhaps some time a true soul will arise in this special subject
and bring about more righteous conditions. God grant that it be so.

With many thanks for your kindly interest in the prisoner, and for the
books sent, I am, with Christian love, Respectfully yours,

  E. S. ——, Life Prisoner.


  Jonesboro, Ark.

Dear Friend: We received your letter and books. We were so glad to get
them. We were playing cards when the sheriff handed them to us. We laid
the cards away and went to reading, and the more we read the more
interested we became. I have prayed to God to forgive me of my sins and
I believe he does, and I want you to pray for me. There are three other
men in here that have turned to God, and it all came about through the
letters and books. We thank you for the Testament. Pray for us and
please send us more of those books and papers. They help us so much.


FROM A PRISON WORKER.

The prison work is growing and precious souls are being saved. It
is wonderful how readily these men accept the full teaching of the
Bible, taking Christ as their Savior and Healer. When I read their
letters so cheerful and so happy in Jesus, it makes me to rejoice.
The work is spreading from state to state and calls are coming in for
pure literature. The state prisons have libraries in them, but they
are filled with novels (so the prisoners tell me), and they desire
something better. When these books and papers are put in their hands
they forsake the cards and novels and read something that will do them
good. We thank God for those who have helped us so much in this work,
but our need this morning is greater than ever because the work is
greater, and we are praying God to touch the hearts of his people to
supply the free-literature fund with ample means to send us another
shipment of books and tracts. A prisoner in Jefferson City and one
in Menard, Ill. have permission to distribute books and tracts they
receive and they are faithfully discharging their duty. May God help us
to keep them supplied, and not them only but other prisons as well. We
do not feel like it is God’s will for us to quit the field now and turn
it over to the enemy when souls are being saved. Let each one do his
duty and the work can be carried on without any one feeling the burden.
Your co-laborer in the work,

  L. P——.




_RELEASED FROM PRISON._


A sentence to a term of years in prison in many states is commuted to
“short time,” so many days being deducted from each month for good
behavior. An attempt to escape or continuance in disobedience will
require a full-term service. In some states there is a parole law
where for good behavior prisoners may be paroled or given liberty to
go anywhere in the state by reporting once or twice a month, stating
their whereabouts, and at the end of a given period, if they do not
abuse their privileges by leaving the state, they will be given a final
discharge.

The state of West Virginia has recently passed a bill to create and
establish a free public employment bureau, which came into effect May
15, 1901, as follows:

“Be it known by the legislature of West Virginia:

“1. The Commissioner of Labor is hereby authorized to organize and
establish in connection with the bureau of labor a free public
employment bureau for the purpose of receiving applications from
persons seeking employment and applications from persons seeking to
employ laborers.

“2. No compensation or fee shall be charged or received directly or
indirectly from persons applying for work, information, or help
through said department. The Commissioner of Labor is hereby authorized
to employ such assistance and incur such expense as may be necessary
to carry into effect the purpose of this act, but such assistance and
expense shall not exceed $500.00 per annum,” etc., etc.

In compliance with this act of the legislature a free public employment
bureau has been established at Wheeling, twelve miles from Moundsville
penitentiary. This will not only be the means of furnishing men with
work who have never been in prison and thus keep them out, but will be
a privilege much appreciated by those who have just been released. It
would be wisdom on the part of the lawmakers of every state to thus
provide a similar institution somewhere near their state prisons.

To the prisoner whose term has just expired we desire to give a few
words of advice. You now start out in life anew. There are great
responsibilities before you. No doubt many of you the world will
meet with a frown, and look disdainfully upon you because of your
past career, or that you have been in prison. Do not give way to
discouragement under such circumstances; face the world with a smile,
shun the places of vice and wickedness, shun evil companions; and on
the other hand, seek society that will be elevating. If strong drink
was at one time a temptation to you or the cause of your downfall,
shun the places where it is sold or used as you would shun death
itself. Likewise shun the card-table and pool-room, which only lead
to a drunkard’s life. Always have courage enough to say No when evil
companions seek to lead you astray. There is a God in heaven who will
help you. Let not a day pass by without prayer to him for his direction
and his protection. If you have never received a change of heart, do
not rest satisfied nor cease pressing the battle on that line until
you have obtained the peace of God in your soul, which is beyond
understanding and flows as a river from the throne of God. You may
have many temptations to fall back into your old habits of life, but
by persistent resentment and applying to the Lord for help you will be
enabled to come out victorious. I remember a few years ago a young man
was released from a prison in New York because of his good behavior
and was given an honorable discharge. He did not care to take up his
old habits again, but as he wandered about from place to place meeting
old companions and associating with them, he found great difficulty in
refraining from picking people’s pockets, as he had been in the habit
of doing in former years. When the temptation came upon him it was
almost like the mania of a drunkard for strong drink, but by asserting
his manhood and making a firm resolve and acting upon it, he decided
to live a true and honest life. He left his associates to attend a
religious meeting where he heard the gospel preached in all its purity,
and there he yielded himself to God and was pardoned of all his actual
transgressions. Although the effects of his sinful, wicked life had
been so great that he had many struggles for months afterwards, he had
taken a step forward and there was a marked change in his life from
that time as well as in his heart, and soon he became established in
the ways of truth and righteousness, married a respectable lady, and
has ever since lived the life of the righteous and been highly esteemed
by those who know him.

A more striking illustration of the appreciation of freedom could
scarcely be given than that of the recent liberation of the Younger
Brothers. A little over a quarter of a century ago the state of
Missouri and surrounding country were terrorized by daring raids made
by the Younger Brothers and James Brothers, who formed a company of the
most daring outlaws and bandits known in this country.

These desperadoes were captured and incarcerated in prison at
Stillwater, Minn., in close confinement for almost twenty-five years.
It is reported that for fifteen years their lives have been reformed,
and in July, 1901 they were liberated under the parole law with the
restrictions that they were not to leave the confines of the state of
Minnesota. Neither are they allowed to drink intoxicants nor lead a
life that is anything but sober and industrious.

[Illustration:

  COLE YOUNGER.      JAMES YOUNGER.
]

During the twenty-five years of their prison life the outside world
had made many changes. There had been many wonderful inventions, and
when released they were like school children on a playground. They
hardly knew which way to turn. The outside world was all strange to
them. Although being men whose years number into the fifties, they
went about as children, laughed and cried alternately for joy, talked
by telephone, rode in an electric car, and enjoyed themselves in many
ways, while kind friends aided in clearing away the mists caused by
twenty-five years of awful solitude. In order to better understand
their appreciation of freedom we here quote their conversation upon
entering the city. Cole Younger remarked to his brother: “I assure you
that this is the best moment of my life. Just think of it! From now I
can act just the same as any one else, but I suppose it will be hard
for me to confine myself to the new rules that I find on the outside.
I have been accustomed to going to bed early, and I expect I will want
to keep early hours when I get out. You can not imagine how I felt to
put on this brand-new suit of store clothes this morning. Only once
before since we came to this prison, a quarter of a century ago, have I
donned citizen’s attire, and that was when I put on the deputy warden’s
suit and sat for a photograph. My clothes look a little odd to me; they
are not quite in style with my regulation first-grade prison suit, but
I suppose they go on the outside. Bless God and our loyal friends for
this moment, which is one of supreme happiness. For the first time in
many years I feel relieved. I feel now as if a great unbearable load
of some kind has been lifted from my shoulders, and that this is the
beginning of a new life. Boys, I want to thank you from the bottom of
my heart for your assistance.”

Although these men were daring desperadoes when placed in prison, yet,
notwithstanding the great reformation that has taken place in their
lives during these years of solitude, we do not wonder that their
actions were like those of children, when we take into consideration
that they were both sentenced for life. We trust their future days
may prove to prison officials and the world at large that the Younger
Brothers are worthy of such a favor, and that their future career and
this action of the Minnesota officials may be an impetus towards the
liberation of every life prisoner, giving them a chance once more to
delight in the freedom which men should enjoy.

A few years ago, in conversation with the Governor of Colorado, he
related an incident of a boy seventeen years of age whose mother was a
widow. He came to Denver and one day while on the street met a young
man who was a stranger, with whom he had not been in company very long
until the stranger friend suggested that they take a ride. A horse
and carriage was near by and as no owner was present the stranger
proceeded to untie the horse and order his young friend to get in.
Scarcely realizing what he was doing he obeyed. And away they went,
driving as rapidly as possible for several miles, when they stopped
and the stranger bade his young friend good-by, leaving him in charge
of the horse and carriage. He was then to some extent awakened to the
situation, but thought he would return the carriage to the place where
it was procured, or if possible turn it over to the owner. But before
reaching the destination he was captured by the authorities and taken
to jail and was soon bound over to answer to the charge of stealing a
horse and carriage. The Governor stated that at that time he was judge
of the court. The boy and his mother feeling so sure that he would be
released on account of his innocency, as he had not the least intention
of stealing, did not procure a lawyer, and after the witnesses had been
examined and the prosecuting attorney had made his plea, the Governor
stated there was nothing for him to do only sentence the boy for a year
in the state prison, although he said at the same time he was sure the
boy was innocent.

I would not feel clear in closing this volume without making a further
plea to the reader, and especially all Christian people, to put forth a
special effort in supplying prisons of every kind with good religious
literature, such as will appeal to the consciences and hearts of men
and women and lead them to a better way. Aside from our penitentiaries
there are many thousands of jails, work-houses, infirmaries, hospitals,
and places of confinement, which have been so sadly neglected that we
even wonder how we can all be held guiltless in the day of judgment if
we do not put forth some effort in this line. Aside from the good books
and tracts placed in their libraries a number of good religious papers
should be sent to all these places weekly. If you can not visit the
prison in person use your dimes or dollars to expend in supplying the
prisoners with good literature.

With the knowledge of the fact that our own boys, our dearest friends,
or even ourselves, are liable to be falsely charged and sent to prison
innocent, our sympathies should be awakened all the more to help those
who are guilty, that we may therefore lend a helping hand to turn
them from the ways of sin and wickedness into the ways of truth and
righteousness.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 43 Changed: former passions crop out irresistably
             to: former passions crop out irresistibly

  pg 93 Changed: was sentence to be hanged
             to: was sentenced to be hanged

  pg 123 Changed: I am with you alway.
              to: I am with you always.

  pg 123 Changed: cleanse us from all unrighteusness.
              to: cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

  pg 131 Changed: Many thanks from all the prioners in jail.
              to: Many thanks from all the prisoners in jail.

  pg 133 Changed: surely appreicate the consideration
              to: surely appreciate the consideration

  pg 138 Changed: denouncing this makebelieve Cristianity
              to: denouncing this makebelieve Christianity





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEHIND THE PRISON BARS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


