The Project Gutenberg eBook of My life and balloon experiences
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: My life and balloon experiences
        With a supplementary chapter on military ballooning

Author: Henry Tracey Coxwell

Release date: February 20, 2025 [eBook #75423]

Language: English

Original publication: London: W. H. Allen & Co, 1887

Credits: Susan E., David E. Brown, E. Nauda, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY LIFE AND BALLOON EXPERIENCES ***



[Illustration: HENRY COXWELL.

(_From a Photograph by Messrs. Negretti & Zambra._)]




  MY LIFE
  AND
  BALLOON EXPERIENCES,

  WITH
  A SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER
  ON
  MILITARY BALLOONING.

  BY
  HENRY COXWELL.

  London:
  W. H. ALLEN & CO. 13 WATERLOO PLACE, S. W.
  1887.




CONTENTS.


                                                      PAGE

  Boyhood and Youth                                      1

  First view of a Balloon                                8

  Juvenile Conflicts                                    11

  Launch at Chatham Dockyard                            23

  School-boy Observations of Green’s Balloon            32

  Settling in Life                                      38

  The Vauxhall Balloon                                  41

  Departure for Amsterdam                               43

  First Ascent                                          48

  Lieutenant Gale’s Balloon                             55

  Nocturnal Ascent                                      59

  Ascents from Chelmsford                               66

  Engagements in Belgium                                69

  The Field of Waterloo                                 88

  Ascent at Cologne                                    108

  Exhibition at Berlin                                 116

  Narrow Escape in Hanover                             131

  Ascent at Leipsig                                    147

  1852                                                 148

  1853                                                 155

  The beginning of Military Ballooning                 167

  Military Ballooning during this Century              176

  Air Torpedoes and Bombshells                         185

  Military Ballooning in the Year of Jubilee           189

  Remarkable Ascents during this Century               202

  Ascent, over five miles high, by Green and Rush      217

  A Jump out of the Car in America                     224

  An Englishman’s Parachute Descent in 1839            225

  Channel Ballooning                                   227




MY LIFE

AND

BALLOON EXPERIENCES.


Not far from Rochester Castle, at Wouldham, on the banks of the Medway,
I first saw the light of day, at the parsonage house, on March 2nd,
1819.

Should this allusion to my birthplace lead to the inference that I am
the son of a clergyman it will not be correct, although I am a grandson
of the Rev. Charles Coxwell, of Ablington House, Gloucestershire; but
my father was a naval officer who had seen a tolerable share of active
service, and who now sought repose in a secluded spot which presented
a striking contrast to the deck of a man-of-war, and to those bustling
scenes of warfare which he had so far participated in as to sustain
personal injury, and to require retirement for the sake of his health.

Before I was old enough to remember any of the first associations
of childhood in this rural abode at Wouldham, our family changed
residence, so that my earliest recollections date from the time shortly
after we had left the parsonage and had taken up our abode on board His
Majesty’s ship “Colossus,” my father having accepted command of the
vessels in ordinary at Chatham. Here we stayed for three years, and,
young as I was, I do not forget being ducked every morning from the
stage of the old seventy-four, nor the swinging round at tide-time of
the black old hulk, and of frequently being pulled ashore in a dinghy
to the marine stairs, where a landing was effected on a plank.

In taking a retrospective view of boyhood, the next circumstance which
impressed me was my being taken to a school at the marine barracks,
where one Sergeant W---- superintended an elementary school for the
sons of officers. Our usher, a corporal, was said to have had a
Cambridge education, but I suppose he went wrong in some weak point
before he enlisted; an under teacher was the master’s son, Jack W----
as he was familiarly styled, a precocious lad who betrayed a decided
proclivity for the young gentlemen’s tarts, so that at last Jack was
regarded as a person who could instruct in _meum_ and _tuum_, but
certainly did not set an example to the pupils in distinguishing
between them.

After I had been some time at this school, an event occurred which
excited the curiosity of all the boys, and which cannot well be
forgotten by those who broke through the rule of not leaving without
permission. One morning, Sergeant W---- and the second in command
appeared at their respective desks in full uniform rather earlier than
usual, and appointed W---- junior to be a monitor, as some important
duty, either on parade or in another remote part of the barracks, was
coming off. “Mind nobody leaves his seat until we return,” was the last
injunction as the sergeant marched out followed by the corporal, whose
general appearance was more intellectual than martial; his red-tailed
coat and black trowsers were conspicuously a misfit, and as he wore a
thin pair of spectacles, no doubt rendered indispensable by university
studies, the usher did somehow or other disturb the gravity assumed by
the obedient scholars. Jack in office, however, otherwise W---- junior,
was fully equal to a demonstrative attitude, and by a vigorous smack of
the cane on an old desk, that had never yet felt paint, struck terror
among us, so that for a few minutes order reigned supreme. Some wicked
wag, however, soon observed that, for his part, all he was afraid of
was that Jack would not remain in office up to the dinner-hour, by
which certain vile insinuations as to the appropriation of cakes,
&c., were conveyed to the nearest boys; this caused an insubordinate
titter, which again brought down the sturdy cane, this time with such
a threatening thump that its actual use on the hands was held to be
highly probable, especially as the talkative lad in the first class
again ventured a piece of undertoned information, albeit of a graver
kind.

“Don’t you know,” he said, “it is punishment morning, and the masters
have left to witness the flogging.”

Now before the lash was mitigated, or abolished, at any rate when I
was a youth, military floggings were of such frequent occurrence that
punishment morning was generally once-a-week; the elder pupils knew all
this, but some of the new boys listened with eager attention, if not
with fear, to the announcement.

“Hush,” cried one, who heard a tramp on the parade ground, a fact which
indicated that the Royal Marines were at that moment marching down to
the rear, where the halberts were invariably pitched, and where five
or six privates were not unfrequently strapped up in succession, each
to undergo from fifty to two hundred lashes, according to the articles
of war, as at that time interpreted. No sooner was it buzzed about
what was to take place than one of my own class--I will not name the
incorrigible--enquired if there was any chance of having a peep.

“No, it is not allowed,” said the big boy, “and anyone found looking
out of the barrack windows, commits a serious offence; but if,” he
continued, with a patronizing air, “you can get behind the green baize
near the door, you and I will slip out and see what is going on.” An
opportunity having presented itself, we deserted forthwith. I was
then led to a hole in a window-frame which had been plugged up, and
evidently used on former occasions.

The Chatham Division of Marines was now to be seen drawn up in square.
The red-painted triangle was ready for the first delinquent, and we
readily recognized the portly frame of the sergeant-major whose voice
disturbed the stillness of the ranks, by saying, “Number one, strip!” I
was struck with the apparent alacrity with which the man took off his
undress jacket, pulled off his shirt, and drew his belt tightly round
his waist; it was the work of a moment; there was no flinching, and he
walked over to the halberts, where his hands and feet were strapped, in
a firm way, which was very sensational and attractive to us ensconced
youngsters. A drummer was immediately at hand in a white jacket,
and the cat hung in his right hand until the sergeant-major cried,
“one” when suddenly the drummer threw himself into position, and the
cat flourished high over his head and fell evenly between the white
shoulders, producing a foul red mark on the fair form which shrugged
perceptibly, but less so as the work proceeded, so that by the time the
first complement of twenty-five lashes had disfigured the poor man’s
flesh, he appeared to be cat-hardened, for no cry or groan escaped his
lips, he took his hundred-and-fifty, and when cast loose, his shirt and
a great coat being thrown over his back, he marched off under escort
to the infirmary, for another kind of dressing, with an amount of
unflinching courage worthy of a better cause.

Number two was a different kind of man altogether; he was stouter, and
his skin looked redder, there was no manifest fear in him; indeed,
he assumed a defiant swagger, and looked round as if for approbation
during the process of securing, nor did the first few strokes make him
writhe like his predecessor, but no sooner had number twelve sounded,
than a piercing groan was uttered, when the fifes and drums were called
into requisition to drown his shrieks; and then, it may as well be
confessed, we withdrew to the schoolroom, after witnessing that which
did upset us, and was calculated to sicken persons in more advanced
life.

The next incident mentally photographed on my mind is one which
took place at the village of Gillingham, situated about three miles
from Chatham. Our house had a commanding view of the river Medway
right away to Sheerness. After leaving the “Colossus,” we had taken
up our quarters in the neighbourhood where a great number of
officers resided. The guard-ship “Prince Regent” lay at her moorings
three-quarters of a mile distant, and my eldest brother, a mate, was on
board awaiting a lieutenancy. He frequently came on shore and visited
us at home; but he had gone away to some foreign station before the
winter of 1827 set in, or he would have accompanied my sisters to the
Rochester ball, probably, in the place of my father who generally
required a little persuasion on the part of the girls before mixing
with the red and blue coats when they were going in for dancing. The
forthcoming Rochester assembly was duly prepared for, of course it was
a carriage drive, and in those days the return journey was not always
considered safe, although highway robbers were getting less frequent;
still it was well to be provided with firearms.

A day or two before the said ball, I was myself an eyewitness of sundry
preparations in the domestic circle; first, there was the coming and
going of dressmakers, and such sort, and on my respected parent’s
side, there was an inspection of small arms, and well I remember it;
the taking down of a naval trophy, very like a horse-pistol, which
was cleaned, and afterwards charged with powder and ball, but the
ammunition was not needed, for the assembly took place, and the girls
were safely housed without any adventure.

On their return the pistol had been placed on the top of an old
escritoire, and on the following Sunday, during divine service in the
parish church--and I may add in our house as well, my mother being
an invalid, and a younger sister being therefore called upon to read
prayers--just at this serious moment I was wandering about the house,
no doubt in search of mischief, when I espied the pistol, and enquired
of Mary the housemaid who was busy bed-making, what that was on the
drawers. Mary had enough to do in minding her own business, so that I
was requested rather pettishly not to bother her. I insisted, despite
this protest in the bed-room, and examined the pistol, asking the
domestic to allow me to snap the flint and steel in the direction of
her foot. I could not keep in check a desire to embark in this little
experimental trigger pulling; of course I had not the slightest idea
that my pistol could by oversight or neglect have remained charged,
nor was I sufficiently practised in gunnery to see the propriety of
examining the pan, or thrusting down the ramrod to ascertain if all
was clear. My idea was to strike sparks from the flint, and I did so,
but “gracious goodness,” as Mary exclaimed when she flew back as if
killed--and no sooner had she shrieked than my own mother and sister
followed suit--not only had I discharged the contents close to the
girl’s foot, but the bullet had gone right through the floor, down
into the room close to my parent’s sofa where she was reclining. What
consternation ensued I cannot describe; had I shot anybody or wounded
myself? Master Henry was most frightened, I am sure, as the pistol fell
from my hand, and I stood pale and amazed, until reassured that no
one was hurt, and that I was not supposed to have had any deliberate
intention of shooting Mary or my dear mother. It was a close shave for
all there, and I required protection on the maternal side after my
father returned from church.

“The young rascal,” he said, “had no business prowling about on a
Sunday morning; it was only a few days previously,” he continued in
a great rage, “that gunpowder had exploded in his pocket.” This was
a fact. I had collected some half cartridges which the soldiers had
dropped at a review, and was about trying my hand at springing a mine,
when my father came in sight, and to avoid detection I thrust a lighted
slow match in my pocket, when some loose powder ignited; being now
called upon for an explanation as to handling the pistol, I pleaded
ignorance as to its being loaded, &c., &c., and as the fault lay really
on my father’s side, I was pardoned, and I believe kissed by Mary for
not having deprived her of existence.

Scarcely six months had elapsed after this first experience of
shooting, ere the village talk turned upon a promised balloon
ascent from the Rochester Gasworks, by Mr. C. Green; several of my
schoolfellows and neighbours were going over to witness the first event
of the kind in that part of Kent. My father had determined not to go
to Rochester, but to be satisfied with a distant view from Chatham
Lines, where I myself, and my brother and sisters, were to assemble on
the occasion. I had strict orders to carry with all possible care an
old spy glass, of about sixteen inches round by two feet and a half in
length. Such a telescope under a boy’s arm now would inevitably excite
ridicule as to its much vaunted day and night powers. I cannot speak
very positively at the present time, though I still possess the said
instrument, and occasionally hand it about as a curiosity, on account
of its having been my father’s and the one that was taken to the hill
overlooking the gas-works to enable me to obtain a good view of Mr.
Green’s balloon, in the year 1828.

It was my lot on that day, as youngest son, to stand erect with back
towards my father, with the spy glass on my right shoulder to admit of
his getting the first view of the balloon. “There it is sure enough,”
was the intimation which only served to make me unsteady and anxious to
see what manner of thing a balloon could be. “Steady young gentleman,”
said the captain, “your sisters and friends wish for a good view. Now
then, take your line straight over Master Henry’s shoulder, as if you
were aiming point blank at that black gas holder, you will see the
balloon half full.” After our party had taken their turns and had
commented on what they saw, I was myself raised to the highest pitch
of expectancy, and could not for the life of me get a proper focus
or catch sight of the object for some time. At length I sighted the
variegated dome, and indulged in a long and selfish gaze; so much so,
that other boys with natural longing gave signs of impatience by elbow
digs, and at length shook the glass and compelled me to look no longer.

After the inflation was completed, we could perceive the balloon being
let up by ropes, and my father volunteered the opinion that persons
were in the car, though I question whether the captain knew much of
such affairs, or whether he had ever been nearer a balloon than he was
that day.

When the partial ascents were over, a number of old naval officers, who
appeared to be tired of waiting, gave it out as their belief that the
real ascent would not be long delayed. I remember the steady gaze of my
father, as he held up the old glass with a fixed look. He was silent
for some time; at length he exclaimed “look out boys,” a request we
attended to and were not kept waiting as in another ten seconds “she’s
off, she’s off,” resounded on all sides, and in less than a minute the
balloon had risen high into the atmosphere, and was gliding away over
Chatham Dockyard. Before the balloon reached the open sea an upper
current perceptibly wafted it inland; it seemed to go on bravely in
spite of danger, and many were the speculations as to where it would
fall. After being up for more than half-an-hour it was pronounced to be
over the Thames, and it could be seen through the clear air until it
was reduced to a mere speck. We heard next day that it alighted safely
in Essex.

It would, no doubt, be instructive to ascertain how far an imposing
spectacle influences the various members of a juvenile community. A
balloon ascent seen by children, generally, cannot produce a desire
for soaring, or aëronauts would be as plentiful as blackberries. In my
case, young as I was, Mr. Green’s ascent, created an interest which
never left me. It was not long before I invested my weekly allowance
of pocket money in sundry sheets of tissue paper, beginning on the
housetops with tiny parachutes, and progressing towards a rudely
constructed paper Montgolfier, which would not rise, and which did
burn, so that my first efforts, like those of most boys in aërostatics,
were unsuccessful; but, being taken with the amusement, I stuck to it,
not persistently, but with frequent flashes of enthusiasm, which are
evidence of a strong taste in that direction.

But there were other exciting pastimes in our seaport town which soon
proved as attractive as those miniature balloon experiments. I must
advert to a few of them, after stating that it had been deemed a fit
and proper time to remove me from my first school and to place me in
one of a higher class, kept by the Brothers B----, in Gibraltar Place,
Chatham. The boarders and day-scholars of this establishment were of
a mixed character, that is to say we had the military element, the
naval boys, and a fair contingent of commercial lads--some from London,
others from Canterbury, Dover, Hythe, and various parts of the country.
Our masters had first-rate pretentions to classical and mathematical
proficiency, and although excellent specimens of good teaching were
to be found among our ranks, yet there was one propensity which was
very strong among us, and that was pugnaciousness. I regret, even at
the present time, to avow that we were known under the sobriquet of
“B----’s bulldogs.” Not only individually but collectively did we earn
and deserve this title; whether it was because there were two or three
other schools in our immediate vicinity whose playgrounds bordered upon
our own, and which led to competitive trials of strength, or whether it
was owing to a martial spirit bred in the very bones of the officers’
boys, I really cannot now take upon myself to decide, but that we were
continually in hot water there remains no manner of doubt; and when I
think of the efforts, the gigantic efforts--if large canes, veritable
cats, and formidable birches are to be accounted as such--that were
made to cure us, I am surprised that more of the fire was not taken out
of us.

Perhaps in that day and generation we were not properly handled and
tamed; something was wrong, that is certain, or we should never have
been known as “B----’s bulldogs.” It is just possible that some of
the more grave and studious of my schoolfellows would object to this
undignified portraiture I am giving of a few of our weak points, I beg
to qualify my description by adding that it does not follow that one
and all were by nature and habits addicted to fighting, but a large
proportion were that way inclined, and I may truthfully add, that
a certain number were known to belong to a band of volunteers--not
such as emulate the regulars in the present day, but to a regiment of
young aspirants shouldering wooden guns and going forth to battle,
the exciting causes being some imaginary affront or some kind of
puerile knight-errantry, which would now be suppressed as unbecoming
and scandalous. No doubt certain allowances should be made for the
degenerate days of a youth before the Reform Bill had passed; and as
one or two of my companions are now staid, distinguished men, long
passed the meridian of life, they will not blush at my disclosures,
for the history of my boyhood is not designed to include by name any
associate. All I aim at is to describe the early scenes of my life,
which cannot well be omitted from this narrative, as they really
occurred.

As a specimen of the way in which we sometimes spent our half-holidays,
that is at the tender age of ten, I will give the following anecdote,
though I had better have passed it over perhaps. On one occasion I had
orders to join the small army to which I belonged, as there was some
chance of active service being engaged in on those wide-spread Chatham
Lines, where the members of our little force might, it was thought
possible, on a certain Wednesday afternoon, be provoked into mimic
warfare. We had recently, when exercising, suffered insult from the
wild half-ragged boys of Brompton, who were mostly soldiers’ sons, and
had a grudge against us on account of our superior personal appearance,
no less than for affecting to be armed and equipped as if we were men,
and equal to doing battle as such if need be. Well, the said boys
guessing that we should be out for drill not far from the trenches had
there assembled.

We fell in regardless of these tormentors, and Colonel H----, that is
our superior officer, who was the son of a live infantry Hibernian
colonel, had given orders to “ground arms,” when with some truth, but
much sarcasm, one of the urchins cried out “ground broomsticks”--of
course in open defiance to us and our leader, who had Irish blood in
his veins.

It was only a few seconds ere our next instructions were to “shoulder
arms, and prepare for action.” So far from “broomsticks,” ours were
wooden guns, in fair imitation of muskets, and the officers had swords,
purchased from a pawnbroker, unless, as in my case, they had been
provided from home in the shape of naval or military weapons, which
had been worn by their fathers in the days of Nelson or Wellington.
Without much ado or parley, we were preparing for close quarters, when
to our surprise, the enemy opened fire with stones, having provided
themselves with these formidable missiles with which they assailed us
at a disadvantage.

Colonel H----, though hit at the outset in the hand, motioned us to
deploy and fall back temporarily towards the sally-port, with a view of
exhausting their resources, before a retaliatory step was taken on our
side.

This strategic movement was well timed, as the ragged ruffians
redoubled their onslaught, but as anticipated, were soon short of
ammunition.

Perceiving at a glance that they were pressing for the bridge, in
order to replenish their pockets with stones, the word “Charge” was
given, and away we darted at the double, H----, himself, drawing his
sword and cutting at the thin air a slashing swish, just to let them
see it was the genuine cold steel he was leading us with, but--bless
the boys!--away they went, helter-skelter, before our colonel had
authorised us to use the butt-ends of our guns if necessary.

They beat us, though, in activity, and kept up their chaff while
running away. H----, I remember overtook the ringleader, who had a head
like a mop, while his garments, such as they were, happened to be made
of patches of old uniforms, partially tattered and torn.

This fellow, with a jeer enough to provoke a saint, exclaimed “Shure
we’ll meet yer on Saturday afternoon, at Tom-all-alones, ye know the
locality, I believe.”

“Agreed,” replied our leader, who brought us to the halt with no great
reluctance, being himself a stout lad of about fifteen years of age.

“We are masters of the field at any rate,” he said.

Not one of our party failed to cheer at the unexpected retreat of our
opponents; we were ill-matched so far as numbers, and stone-throwing
powers were concerned, but as H---- explained, we should have a better
chance on next meeting, as the soil was of clay at Tom-all-alones,
which is situated below the Brompton barracks, where there were at that
time model earth-works, and the sites of recently sprung mines to take
possession of.

We agreed also upon the advisability of securing the services of the
naval brigade, which had among those enrolled, some schoolfellows,
including my brother, who was just fifteen months my senior, and
thoroughly in advance of me, and indeed of his years, as regards acts
of downright daring.

On the following half-holiday, the combined forces, composed of
day-scholars, proceeded in two divisions to the proposed scene of
action. As it happened, we were the first on the ground, and no time
was lost in taking possession of an earth-work, or rather clay-work,
not long thrown up by Colonel Paisley and his Engineer detachment.
Guessing what would be the tactics of the rebels, no time was lost in
preparing a pile of balls, as in all probability we should be attacked
with such, at the commencement of the expected onslaught.

Having added to our numbers since the last brush, we awaited with
confidence an attack, nor were we long in doubt as to the arrival of
the enemy, as their outposts were descried in the distance, and soon
a scattered and disorderly force appeared on the rising ground to our
left; on they rushed, without any apparent organisation, but this time
they had sticks in their hands, and some were seen to have something in
their pocket handkerchiefs which were slung on one arm.

The Brompton lads had evidently heard that we were at the place
appointed, but they halted on perceiving how favourably we had
established ourselves, and that we had manufactured a conical heap
of clay balls. It was not long before they followed suit, their
bull-headed leader, who gave the challenge, being conspicuous by his
clothes and size. While thus preparing for an attack they withdrew
to a heap of moist clay, where they could be seen pressing the earth
into round shot. Some one of ours proposed to sally out and disperse
them, but H---- thought we had better hold our own, as possession of an
earth-work was nine points in our favour.

They were quicker and greater adepts at their work than we had been,
and the chances were that they would lick us at out fighting, so that
H---- sent, or sanctioned, a sortie by way of diversion, when a party
of our naval fellows made a dash at them when least expected, but in
numbers our men, like the six hundred riding at the Russian batteries,
were quite unequal to the contest, and suffered terribly; my brother
and several others came in bleeding, but our foes were disturbed and
brought to close quarters, where they resolutely let fly as if they
expected to dislodge us in no time, but we were several feet above
them, and they would have to scale our ramparts before driving us out.
In less than five minutes the exchange became uncommonly smart and hot.
I was also disfigured, as the clay begrimed not only our jackets but
our faces and hands.

No great length of time elapsed before it became as plain as a
pike-staff that we were getting the worst of it, and no wonder. H----
discovered the reason, “those ruffians,” he cried, “popped in stones
beneath their clay, we must at them at once; are you ready?”

“Then hurrah, and away, show no quarter.”

Down we rushed, the foul play that had been detected animating us with
the pluck and dash of adult warriors.

“Let ’em have it,” cried H----, unmindful of a wound in the head which
caused the blood to flow copiously. I, too, was hit, as indeed were one
and all of us, but “onwards boys,” was the word, and just as we were on
the point of crossing sticks and guns, they fell back suddenly, but not
before a personal exchange of compliments came off between our colonel
and the burly leader on the enemy’s side. In fact H---- closed with
him, and laid hands on his throat which brought him to the ground.

This incident gave a turn to the fortune of war, and at the real
tug which decides so many battles we were again the victors, most
unmistakeably so this time, as it became a total rout, and the
ringleader was not released until he rendered up his stick and pledged
himself never again to oppose or make light of us while exercising.

It was not very long after this scrimmage that a painful circumstance
occurred, and as it concerned three of us who had fought in company,
and who were shortly after fated to have a difference among ourselves,
I may as well mention it at once. I do so with twinges of regret even
at this distant period of time, as I was led, almost unwittingly, into
a fresh squabble which disfigured, I am aware, my early doings.

It was in this wise. My brother who was in the last affair (not an
elder brother who was in the Royal Navy), had some high words with my
colonel, H----, who had led us twice into action as recounted. H----,
by design or inadvertence, had cast a slur on our father--not that I
heard it or was aware of it until John, my brother, came in one day and
said, “Henry, we are going to fight H----.”

“Indeed,” I cried with doubt and pain; “what for, he is my colonel, I
have had no quarrel with him?”

“Well, it is all settled; he has insulted papa. Here’s Johnson, he will
tell you all about it, and when it is to come off. Owing to H----’s
size and age he is going to take the pair of us.”

“You see Master Henry,” said Johnson, who was a marine bandsman, and
who assisted, when off duty, in our house, “the captain, your father,
has been grossly insulted.”

“Only you make that clear, Johnson, and I am ready,” was my reply.

“Well, you had better step up into my room, young gentlemen, at once,
as time is on the wing, and will brook no delay.”

The bandsman having disclosed the nature of the aspersion, and the
hour having been fixed for the encounter, I found myself with no way
of escape consistent with honour and respect for a parent; so that I
may as well make a clean breast of another blot on my life’s history by
avowing that, the same evening, in a back yard, on suitable premises,
rented by one McMollon, a linesman, Johnson had arranged for the
meeting to take place; and for the better understanding of the why
and wherefore, as also of the respective characters of Johnson and
McMollon, I must unavoidably state that these worthies were, to some
extent, rivals, as Johnson was in our employ and McMollon was not,
though he wished to be. The former, moreover, was a Royal Marine of the
Chatham Division, while the latter was of another cloth altogether: and
then again the bandsman was a Man of Kent, while the soldier hailed
from the other side of St. George’s Channel, so that their brogue and
tastes were quite opposed.

McMollon considered that H---- had not insulted Johnson’s “bhoys,” as
he accentuated his allusion to us, and the Englishman swore in strong
Saxon that H---- had, and that the affair should be fought out.

Preliminaries having been settled, an adjournment took place to
Johnson’s private quarters, which were located near our back garden, as
was McMollon’s house and yard, though they were fully a stone’s throw
apart from the bandsman’s rooms and from our place.

On entering Johnson’s room, he threw off his coat, and then drew with
a piece of chalk a line across the floor, and brought us up to the
scratch, as he roughly named the place of demarkation. He then threw
himself into a pugilistic attitude and thus addressed us:--

“You are going to face, young gentlemen, a strapping young fellow,
whose hit may prove like the kick of a horse. From what I know of
you both, I have no fear whatever of the issue, if you follow my
advice; but if he lands his left on Master Henry’s nose and his right
between Master John’s eyes, by taking you apart and dropping on to you
unawares, then I’ll not answer for the consequences. Now look here! I’m
your opponent; please to foot the chalk line, and square up like men.
Capital--anyhow as a sample. Now, please not to forget that in round
one Master Henry must hit for the wind, and you, Master John, must play
for the face--left and right like a sledge-hammer. No. 2 then recovers
himself, and next pops in another compliment on the nob, as we call it
in the classics; and if you land your blows, as I expect you will, Col.
H---- will be taken all aback, and round one will soon be over.”

“But hold; look here Johnson,” I said, “supposing that when I aim at
the wind I catch one in the eye, how then?”

“Oh! that’s what we’re coming to. If you, after a spurt in sparring,
throw your guard well over your face, and butt in smartly at the same
time, you score a shot between wind and water, and then the figure-head
is open for master John. Come now, just go through it.”

But without further shocking or harassing the refined minds of my
readers, suffice it to say that we were put through these tactics
ultimately to the satisfaction of our accomplished instructor, and by
the time we faced H---- in McMollon’s yard, we came up with an air of
confidence which seemed to gladden the bandman’s heart.

H----, on being supported by McMollon, merely buttoned his blue jacket,
but we, in obedience to Johnson’s request, took off ours and then
tucked up our sleeves. We cut a poor figure, however, in a physical
aspect, as opposed to our big antagonist, who smiled as if he could
knock us to pieces, if he were so disposed.

“Faith, be jintle with them, Misther H----” said McMollon, when
Johnson--unmindful of swagger--put us forward with calm assurance,
and we lost no time in obeying his orders; perceiving that we stood
well as to position, he cried out “Now lads,” when in I went, to the
astonishment of H---- and his second, while my brother hit out well
from the shoulder, as told to do at rehearsal.

“Follow up, Master Henry,” cried Johnson, “ding dong, go it, the pair
of you.”

But, at this interesting moment, a manly figure came forward and,
pushing our backer aside, he dealt us both two sharp cuts on the back
with his walking-stick. It was my father!

“Disgraceful!” he exclaimed.

“How is this, Johnson, a pugilistic encounter?”

“The truth is, it is all about yourself, Captain.”

“Eh, what do you say, about me?”

“Well, the fact is, Master H----, yonder, insulted your good name, and
the young gentlemen took it up.”

“Oh! that’s it; well, I shall return in ten minutes, and if all this is
not over I shall be very angry.”

Pater then, to the bandsman’s delight, went away; an act which was
interpreted to mean, “go in and win,” which we did in a very short
period of time, to the dismay of McMollon, who now rounded on Johnson,
but the royal marine, of the Chatham division, was nothing daunted,
though a much smaller man; his coat was off, and he was well to the
front in no time.

“Shure the captain’s coming; don’t get yourself into trouble, now,”
cried McMollon, and with this excuse he declined to be mixed up in
the fray; and it is due to H---- to admit that, after the contest, he
explained that his insinuations were entirely misunderstood, and that
the Coxwells were far too touchy. This remark had in it some semblance
of truth, perhaps, but the explanation being accepted, we shook hands,
and were as good, if not better friends than ever.

As a description of my boyish pranks will lead to an inference that
the game of soldiers was to me a labour of love, still it must not be
supposed that I was indifferent to nautical pursuits and ship-building.

There was a fine field at Chatham for youths who aspired to serve their
country, and who had a liking for naval architecture. Much of my spare
time was spent in the machinery and dockyard departments. The parents
of some of my schoolfellows resided in the great naval depot, and
there were about half-a-dozen of us who inherited a strong bent for
everything appertaining to the wooden walls of Old England.

We had heard our fathers’ stories of sea fights, and cutting out
expeditions, of the days of two broad-sides and board, of chasing
foreign frigates, and of attacking the combined fleets of France
and Spain, until a lively interest in such undertakings was pretty
generally felt among us. Ready access being afforded to see the dry
and wet docks, slips, and gun wharf, we were fairly posted up in all
that was going forward to maintain, at that time, our supremacy on the
seas.

Although the dimensions of Chatham Dockyard have vastly extended since
the year 1831, still they were of no small magnitude then. There was
generally a first-rate on Number One slip, and a couple of ninety
gun ships close at hand, while lower down the yard an eighty-four
and several frigates, corvettes, and brigs of war were to be seen
in different stages of advancement. The dry docks too--especially a
new stone one--were invariably occupied, and in the river there was
constantly a vessel in commission, so that we frequently put off to
visit the officers, and to watch the progress of fitting out.

We had been observing for some time the completion of His Majesty’s
ship “Monarch,” and were eagerly looking out for her launch, not
because it would be a novelty to us--for we seldom omitted such
ceremonies--but we had agreed to be on board as she went off the
stocks. From some cause, better known to the Admiralty than to us, the
launch had been put off from time to time, until we grew impatient. At
last we noticed that the cradles were up, and that a coat of yellow
paint had been laid on, and finally we ascertained that when the next
spring tide served, this splendid eighty-four was destined to take the
water.

The day having been fixed, we either obtained or _took_ a whole
holiday--a half-holiday was no kind of use to us. We did not care to
arrive with the fashionable visitors who gathered about half-an-hour
before the christening. What we wanted was to be present during the
preliminary operations of removing the supports, and splitting out
the blocks from beneath the keel, and, in fact, of witnessing the
mechanical process of transferring the entire weight of a stupendous
ship on to the “ways” down which the “Monarch” was to slide.

From an early hour in the morning every available shipwright was at his
post accomplishing this task. It would never do to remove the spars
that propped up each section of the enormous hull until the day of the
launch; the strain would be too great on the timbers were this done
until the cradles are driven tight by wedging, which was just what we
took delight in. All hands were summoned for this office, when the
blows from a thousand hammers struck home and blended in one harmonious
sound.

The master shipwright and Bardoe the pilot were to be seen in company
during these preparations. An important personage was Bardoe; he was a
bluff, stalwart seaman, with a voice to be heard the other side of the
Medway, a Newcastle man by birth, and one to be obeyed, but gentle,
communicative, and a decided favourite with us boys.

“Now young gentlemen,” said the pilot, “you are here betimes, pray keep
out of mischief and mind your heads, they are just going to knock away
some of those props; and let’s see, you want to go with us, don’t you?
I hardly know what to say about it to-day; I shall have a large gang of
convicts aboard to assist in ‘bringing her up,’ and my orders are to be
strict about visitors.” “All right Mr. Bardoe, you’ll find room for us
I daresay.”

The tide was now flowing freely, and the yard began to be astir
with strangers. Many persons, quite ignorant of the details of
shiplaunching, were seeking information, and with no little pride we
undertook to enlighten a few, explaining the principle of launching,
and then conducting the inquirers to the dog-shores, comparatively
small pieces of timber, but forming the last connecting link, which,
being knocked away by falling pieces of iron, admit of the vessel
gliding into the stream.

Around the bows, and on either side of the “Monarch,” spacious stages
were erected for the accommodation of the public. Hosts of civilians
in gay dresses were arriving, and what with military uniforms, and
a strong muster of blue-coats, appearances were becoming uncommonly
lively.

Nor was the scene less stirring afloat, as aquatic parties were
rowing hither and thither, and a long line of boats began to take up
their positions in close proximity, not without peril, as the swell
becomes great when a quantity of water equal to the displacement of a
man-of-war is set in motion, and the boats’ crews have to look out in
case of being upset.

As it was drawing near to one o’clock the Marine band marched down, and
began playing inspiriting tunes. We then mounted the last ladder by
the ship’s side, and caught Bardoe’s eye; he was rather stiff with the
responsibilities of office, and had just given orders to clear away the
ladder which was moving already, so that no further person could enter
the ship. “Look alive young gentlemen,” Bardoe sung out, “tumble in
through a port-hole”; a privilege which we were not long in availing
ourselves of.

A stir with Bardoe’s gang of convicts next drew our attention. The
pilot had ranged his men to let go the anchors at a given order,
and for this they had to hold themselves in readiness. Presently a
tremendous thumping was heard under the “Monarch’s” bows, and then a
cheer arose. “Look out,” cried the pilot, “she is being christened”;
then all was silent, and a voice was heard, “Are you all ready Bardoe”?

“All ready, Sir,” was the prompt response.

Another sound was then heard: “Down goes the dog-shores!” exclaimed
Bardoe; then followed a slight tremble from stem to stern. “There she
goes,” resounded on all sides, as we began moving down the slip with a
pace which was at first easy, but which soon became accelerated to a
rapid, resistless, majestic descent, increasing as we took the water,
so that it seemed as if nothing could check our way until we reached
the opposite bank of the river. Bardoe had his eye on the stream, and
at the proper moment sung out lustily, “Stand by, my lads, let go,”
when down fell a huge anchor, and then a second one, which lessened
our speed. “Pay away handsomely,” exclaimed the pilot. “Port your helm
hard.” “Port it is, Sir,” by which movement the “Monarch” was brought
round skillfully, and prevented from touching the river mud.

There were two sentries on board having muskets loaded with ball
cartridge, as at times, an escaped convict would swim the Medway and
land unscathed on the Upnor Castle side of the river. Nothing of this
kind was attempted, however, on board the new line-of-battle ship which
had now entered her proper element, so that we landed in a boat without
having witnessed anything more sensational than the launch. A passing
reference to this scene may be considered by the reader as inapplicable
to the life of a balloonist; but I cannot well omit subjects of the
kind, if I faithfully chronicle the incidents of my early life, which I
am determined to portray to the letter, even if the general character
of my boyhood suffers thereby.

“Why not point out how you progressed with your studies, where you and
your friends worshipped, how many prizes you had for good conduct, and
such like?” asks a well-wisher to whom I read some of these pages in MS.

“The fact is,” I replied, “a very little of that sort of thing will
go a long way,” and we may come to it by and bye, but as I was a lad
of action, and have in after life stuck to my colours, though it was
thought I was cut out either for a parson or a soldier officer; I
must be true to my bent, and as to pretending that I was studious, or
intellectually inclined--well I will not affect anything of that sort,
having ever alluded to myself as a practical man; at the same time I do
hope, that by being straight-forward as to my plan and intentions, I
may not prove altogether dull in this truthful narrative.

“Still harping upon those horrid uninteresting experiences of your
early life and doings?” yes, and I must hark back upon a few other wild
acts and thereby risk further censure with an obtuseness deserving of
reprehension.

In this fresh adventure, I was all alone in my glory, having embarked
single-handed in a little practice with firearms.

My first essay with a horse-pistol, already described, when I nearly
shot a servant and my own relations, did not produce that dread that
might have been expected. Certainly I was now older, and had fought
with a wooden gun, had watched soldiers load, present, and fire, but
the fright attending my first efforts ought, by good right, to have
made me nervous on this score for many a year to come.

In one of my father’s rooms which was not marked strictly private,
there were some guns, swords, pistols, and a frightful old Spanish
blunderbuss with a bell-mouthed barrel and a bayonet affixed, which
was kept down by a catch. Whether it was that I had a coarse, depraved
taste in occasionally looking over this armoury, I cannot say, but
the blunderbuss took my fancy vastly. One day I became bold enough
to borrow it for a trial, and I surreptitiously provided myself with
ammunition, going among the ramparts in quest of something to let fly
at. As may be guessed, I made a poor hand with birds, owing to the
bell-mouthed weapon scattering so much. Annoyed at this, a packet of
ball cartridge was undone and I resolved to engage in target practice.
Following a road which led to the Spur battery, a disused sentry-box
presented itself, and as nobody appeared to be about, I made a circle
on one side, took aim, and fired!

Just as I was examining the effect, a file of the guard came in sight,
and I was sorely perplexed as to how to avoid detection, especially as
I noticed that daylight was let into the sentry-box on both sides; the
ball having penetrated through and through.

There were deep trenches on one side of the road and high palings
on the other, so that escape was impossible. Only one remedy was
applicable, and that was to keep moving with a view of diverting
attention from the damaged property; but the corporal was not to be
hoodwinked, he instantly detected what I had been at, and challenged me
to stand until I was overtaken.

In less than a minute I was a prisoner, and was marched off to the
guard-house. Here I was examined by a sergeant and sent with an escort
to the upper barracks.

On my way there I became the object of derision. When I was taken into
the presence of some officers on duty, I felt my position the more
keenly as Major O---- was my father’s friend and frequently visited our
house.

It was impossible to suppress a smile at my grotesque appearance,
carrying as I did the old blunderbuss, and I almost hoped that Major
O---- did not recognise me, as he turned his back and looked out of the
window.

The offence I had been guilty of having been notified, Major O----,
still gazing on to the parade, enquired if any sentry was on duty at
the time I fired. The information tendered being in my favour, Major
O----, without deigning to inspect me, ordered the sergeant to proceed
to my parents, and to request that I should not be permitted to handle
so dangerous a weapon for the future.

Slight as the sentence might have appeared, yet to me it was a
heavy one, as I was in no way prepared to face my father under the
circumstances.

On my way home I explained to the sergeant that we knew Major O----,
and I asked if he would mind going in the back way. To this proposition
he assented, and fortunately so, as the first person encountered was
our cook, who was a Scotchwoman and who espoused my cause, and insisted
that the sergeant should take some refreshment in the kitchen before
lodging his complaint in the parlour.

Cooky then stated that the captain was not at home, but that she would
undertake to deliver any message appertaining to my delinquency, when
the sergeant stated his orders from Major O----.

The cook observed that it was sure to be right, and that the major
would be at our house that evening to a party.

Sure enough the major came, and I saw him, but the cook had failed to
see my father, and the reticent major did not allude to the morning’s
interview, but politely left me in doubt as to whether he knew me or
not.

Among the various localities in which in some capacity or another I
well remember to have figured, was Gillingham Reach; here we were
accustomed to bathe, and three of us, viz., my brother, self, and
Stanley R----, a schoolfellow, had been disporting ourselves one day
for some time, where the stream ran fast, and I got out of my depth.

R---- was a splendid swimmer, and was far out in the tide, but I
disappeared and was beyond the reach of my brother, who, like myself,
could not swim.

Fortunately for me my friend Rudd was just in time to save my life, a
service which I am proud to acknowledge in these pages with his full
name.

Somewhat lower down, at a hard where boats could be pulled up, my
brother and I wandered one afternoon with a view of going off to one
of the ships in ordinary. We waited for a long time hoping to see a
waterman, but as no one appeared we took French leave and rowed away in
a flat-bottomed boat which had previously been pulled up high and dry.

It happened to blow a strong westerly wind, but, boy-like, we took
little heed of this until we got well out into the middle of the
Medway. Then we discovered our mistake, as the wind and tide were
setting one way; we missed the ship, and were swept down the river in
the direction of Long Reach. All the efforts we made to pull were of no
avail, but it so happened that our course was towards the guard-ship
“Prince Regent.” We managed to row as nearly as possible in this
direction with a view of obtaining assistance, but the waves were very
rough, and had it not been for a seaman who hailed us out of the port
bow we should have been carried away to Sheerness, and perhaps to sea.

This worthy, perceiving that we had no control over the boat, sung out
lustily, “Pull in shore, my lads,” a piece of advice which we were just
enabled to put in practice; by so doing, we crossed the river, and,
although we were taken a long way on the weather side, yet here we
were less exposed to the wind and tide. My brother then took off his
clothes, and pushed the boat up by the stern. It was a long and tedious
undertaking, but we got back safely and deposited the boat as we found
it, without complaint or even detection.

In the year 1832, my father was taken seriously ill with a pulmonary
complaint, brought on by injuries he received in boarding a Spanish
line-of-battle ship. Several of his ribs were broken in this action,
and he was never able to go to sea again, as it brought on spitting of
blood. In the month of June he breathed his last, and as my mother was
an invalid, and the neighbourhood was not considered to suit her case,
we soon left the seaport and moved to Eltham, which was not far distant
from Woolwich, where my eldest brother was previously stationed in a
frigate. A school was selected for myself and second brother in the
vicinity of Woolwich Common, where young gentlemen, as at Chatham, were
prepared for the Military College.

During our stay at Eltham, I frequently used to spy balloons in the
air, as they came from some of the Metropolitan gardens. Often have I
watched them career along with a degree of interest which fast gained
upon me, so that nothing would do, but I must go up to London and see,
if possible, Mr. Green.

I was walking out one evening, when an object emerged from the clouds,
which was rapidly descending. I perceived the grapnel at the end of a
rope, and knew all about it in a moment.

Here was a chance of witnessing a descent. My heart leaped with joy,
and I stood still until I made out the balloon’s course.

That being settled, I struck out like a hunter over hedges and ditches,
and came up at the death before the gas had been exhausted.

It was Mr. Green’s balloon! The aëronaut was very busy, and, as I
thought, rather ill tempered with the people for not standing back as
he ordered them.

In my anxiety to get a close view, I first came in contact with the
celebrated aërial voyager. I was pushing my way to the front ranks,
and was looking at the valve, when I was admonished for my pains, and
informed that I had better go to Greenwich Hospital. This advice raised
a laugh, though I was at a loss to understand the reason, until my
personal appearance became the subject of observation; then I perceived
the force of Mr. Green’s remark.

It appeared that my face was covered with scratches and blood. I had
unflinchingly taken the shortest route, and, in my excitement, had
bounded through every obstacle that came in my way, even hedges and
ditches, so that, without knowing it, I was the veriest object among
the crowd, my clothes being bedaubed and torn; whilst my hands and face
were scored terribly.

The ardent desire to have a close view of a balloon having been
gratified, I now determined to watch the newspapers for the next
ascent, and to be present at the inflation; but as aërial voyages
were not quite so frequent about this time as they became a few years
later, I had to wait some months; and as a change had taken place in
my scholastic movements, I was not exactly master of my time, having
become a parlour boarder at a fresh school, viz., at Northampton House,
Camberwell.

It seemed a very long while before I heard anything in reference to
an intended ascent. At last a placard caught my eye as I was out
exercising with my schoolfellows.

Mr. Green was going up from the Surrey Zoological Gardens, and as our
playground was not more than a mile distant in a straight line, I
expected to get a tolerable view, especially as there were some stately
elms in our grounds, which I was bent upon mounting.

Long before there was any chance of catching sight of the balloon,
I had climbed up the highest tree by way of reconnoitering. The
boys generally manifested great interest in the affair; but my zeal
was acknowledged to be in advance of the rest, and I was considered
an authority on the matter, and looked up to as one who could give
information of the proceedings.

Twice had I perched myself on a lofty branch before I could announce
anything satisfactory; at last I perceived the top of the balloon and
communicated afterwards that it was filling out and getting higher, so
that there was a general look-out, and when I signified that she was
off, a cheer arose greeting the information, and there was a cry of
“bravo Harry,” as if _I_ had committed myself to the realms of space
instead of to the tree top as a mere look-out. Not many days passed
before the faculty of imitation was brought into play, so far as we
could manage it, in the hour allotted to recreation.

As to a balloon, we could not improvise one of any magnitude, but
I bethought me that a car might be manufactured, and that we could
attach this to a strong branch of an elm, and swing off as if we were
emulating Mr. Green. A wooden construction was forthwith knocked up,
and cords attached to take an equal bearing, and then a good thick
rope was fastened to the whole and made fast to an elastic arm of the
chosen tree; a second cord was fixed to the body of the tree by which
the car was drawn in and secured. I then took my seat and invited a
passenger to accompany me; it wasn’t every lad who cared about the
venture, but I found a companion and let go the side rope. We swung
out to a considerable distance, and fancied ourselves aëronauts; but
the sport was cut short by the head master who would not sanction that
particular kind of ballooning, as he considered it more perilous to
life and limb even than a more extended flight in _nubibus_.

On the following Whit Monday I ascertained that Mr. Green was to make
another ascent from the Surrey Gardens, and I obtained permission to
devote that day to aëronautics. On my arrival in the morning I found
that I was the first visitor, and that the gate had not been thrown
open. When I had hung about and paraded up and down for more than an
hour the gate-keeper took pity on me, and I was allowed to enter; not
of course without paying. I found my way to the spot selected for
filling, but no gas had gone in as yet, in fact Mr. Green and some
other men were laying the balloon out, which suited me admirably, as I
wished, beyond all things, to see the process from its commencement.

I was wondering whether the aëronaut would recognise me as the boy with
a scratched face who made himself conspicuous at his former descent.
The aëronaut, however, was intent upon his business and anxious to
proceed with it, as I inferred from repeated references to an enormous
silver watch.

Presently a workman presented himself with a large iron key to the
gas valve, and this man, although a rough lazy-looking fellow, was
pronounced by Mr. Green to be the most welcome visitor he had seen yet,
by which I took it that he meant no offence to me, but that he was the
individual who could render him the most important service. Shortly
after the man with the key disappeared, the silk began to rise, and the
aëronaut was all astir in allowing gas to flow towards the valve, and
to expand the top part first.

I had a good opportunity of noticing every movement that was made, and
in my eagerness to gather information I followed Mr. Green about, and
almost fancied that he looked upon me as if I were too officious. I
would fain have spoken to him, but there was a peculiar curl about his
lips which conveyed the idea that I had better mind my own affairs, and
leave him to himself. Still there was something strongly characteristic
about his bearing I thought, he was very precise and skilful in his
manipulations, and looked to me like a man who engaged in his vocation
from motives of scientific interest, rather than from those of vanity.

I felt rather glad when the public began to assemble, especially on
the arrival of some of Mr. Green’s friends, as I heard the passing
conversation, and got some information in that way.

“Well Mr. Green,” said one gentleman, “who is going up to-day”?

“You are Sir, if you think proper, your twenty pounds is just as good
as another’s.”

This interrogator confined himself to the one question, only he
seemed quite satisfied. For my part I received a wet blanket to all my
youthful aspirations. If that is the fee I thought, it will be many a
day and year before I can think of ascending.

Although there was a splendid collection of animals to be seen, and
many other things besides, yet I never left the balloon until it was
filled and away. I question whether, among the young people assembled,
there was a more attentive visitor than myself. The only drawback
to the great pleasure I derived in seeing a balloon filled, was the
appearance and manners of those connected with the undertaking.

I had read of Pilatre de Rosier, a man of high attainments, of
Gay-Lussac, the eminent French chemist, and of Lunardi, the Secretary
of the Neapolitan Ambassador; and I thought that the aërial party I
had seen fell short of my expectations in more respects than one; but
if the standard by which I ought to have judged was competency and
professional aptitude, then I felt that credit for all that kind of
thing was eminently due to the Greens.

Some time before my visit to the Surrey Gardens I had been amusing
myself in making boats and in fitting them up for a miniature race in a
large fish pond.

All my carpenter’s tools and ship-building knowledge were now
thrown aside for Montgolfiers and air balloons. I could hold forth
on aërostation and illustrate the principles of that science with
tolerable proficiency by the time I was fifteen years of age. But I was
devoting too much time to this kind of work, that is, if the opinions
of my well wishers and friends were correct.

My elder brother, who was a wise and good man, thought it high time
that more serious tastes appertaining to a profession should take the
place of mere airy nothings, which appeared to absorb so much of my
attention. It was pointed out, that as our prospects in life had been
changed through certain property having passed into other hands, and
as our interest, owing to the death of my father, was less likely than
formerly to get myself and second brother into the navy and army, we
should prepare ourselves, if need be, for commercial engagements, which
would, perhaps, prove more advantageous and profitable than the kind
of occupation we had been led to expect that we should ultimately be
engaged in.

Although my eldest brother was a naval officer, yet he was of a
philosophical and religious turn of mind, and his actions added such
weight to his convictions, that he may be said to have been our second
father in all kinds of excellent advice. It was not that he evinced
the slightest indifference to any branch of science, on the contrary,
he frequently used to converse with me about balloons, and was, to a
certain extent, pleased that I had possessed myself of some information
on the subject; but he laid stress upon the folly of one in my position
thinking very much of such things, and I must needs own that his
arguments had their temporary influence, and subdued for a while a
passion which was seen to be growing by none more than those who were
near and dear to me.

It was the year 1835, when I had shot up a few inches and had changed
a blue jacket for a black tail coat, that the reality of life, and
the importance of doing something, came pretty strong upon my mind.
My brother John had already been despatched to a counting-house in
Amsterdam, he had finally given up all hope of going to sea, and
knew there was very little chance for me as regards the Army. Family
affairs, and what is called destiny, seemed to be dead set against our
serving our country, although no two boys ever longed to do so more
than ourselves.

My eldest brother, too, had left the service, not on account of natural
distaste to it, for no officer was ever more zealous, but, owing to
religious scruples, he had resigned his commission just as he had
completed a course of study on board the “Excellent.”

These slight references to domestic matters being essential, and indeed
inseparable from my own life, I mention them--though with all possible
brevity.

The tail coat and other indications of becoming a young man, did not
produce a positive and settled belief in any special line of life for
which I considered myself suited. I was by no means quick in forming an
opinion myself. One of my sisters--I had two at that time--used to say
I should make a good clergyman. Perhaps I might have done so, many a
youth mistakes his calling; but the truth is that I hardly knew what to
turn to.

In the meantime I used to indulge, oftentimes clandestinely, in my
favourite pastime by visiting the public gardens of London; I should
state by-the-bye, only to see what was going on in the aëronautic way.

During the following year something remarkable, in that line, had
engaged public attention. It was the building of a very large balloon,
at Vauxhall Gardens, by Messrs. Gye and Hughes, under the personal
superintendence, and according to the plans of Mr. Green. This was
something new and absorbing, that diverted my fancy from other affairs,
and set me reading the papers and talking about the matter, until I
became a perfect bore to my associates. I soon learnt full particulars,
including the number of yards of silk to be employed, its texture
and quality, the cubic contents of the balloon, and how many people
it would raise, &c., &c., all of which induced me to believe that
everybody was as interested in the affair as myself.

I prattled and enquired, until it occurred to the home minister, in
other words, to my elder brother, that some step had better be taken to
settle my mind in a solid and business train of thought.

Would I go to Holland, and become a merchant’s clerk?

No objection--I would try my hand at it, but I questioned whether I
could stand it.

Was there anything to prevent my starting at once?

Nothing particular, only I should like to see the first ascent of that
large balloon which was to ascend shortly.

What were such vain and trifling affairs compared with Henry’s future
prospects? asked my sage mentor.

“Just so, but a week’s delay won’t make much difference,” was my
answer, “especially as I have as yet no regular engagement.”

“Shall we arrange that you join your brother in September, at
Amsterdam?”

“Yes, after the 9th, I shall be ready to leave.”

The launching of the Vauxhall balloon was a day “big with fate,” and
the morning was auspicious; but at two o’clock the weather changed, and
from that time until half-past four it rained incessantly. Thirty-six
policemen were placed around the balloon during the inflation, each
taking charge of one of the cords connected with the network. Forty-one
iron weights, of fifty-six pounds each, were attached to the cordage;
these were soon three feet from the ground, and the policemen were
then compelled to pass their staves through the meshes, to prevent the
cords cutting their hands. This combined resistance was, however, found
insufficient, and twenty other persons were called to assist. By this
time the netting and silk must have absorbed 300 lbs. weight of water,
besides a quantity retained on the top of the balloon. The inflation
was completed in four hours and five minutes; twenty-four bags of
ballast, weighing together 400 lbs., were then placed in the car, and
the grapnel was attached with an elastic cord of caoutchouc and hemp,
which was designed to prevent any sudden jerk in stopping the balloon.

The aërial party consisted of nine persons, including five of the
family of the Greens, besides Captain Currie, Mr. Hildyard, Mr.
Holland, Mr. Edwin Gye and Mr. William Hughes--sons of the proprietors
of Vauxhall Gardens.

The appearance of the balloon was truly magnificent; and, though
ponderous, nothing could exceed its graceful beauty. Mr. Green found
that the ascending power was considerably more than he had announced to
the public, he was therefore compelled to allow 15,000 cubic feet of
gas to escape before he could release the balloon from its moorings,
there not being room in the car for more voyagers.

All being ready, the ropes were loosened, and the stupendous machine
shot rapidly into the upper regions. It proceeded at first to the east,
but soon took a south-easterly direction.

The gardens, and every avenue leading to them, appeared to be one solid
mass of human beings; in fact there was not an elevated spot within two
miles which was not covered with spectators.

The course of the balloon was along the Thames, in the direction of
Gravesend. The grappling iron first touched ground near the village of
Cliffe, in Kent; and, after slightly catching several times, took a
firm hold. The voyagers enjoyed themselves much.

This imposing spectacle having passed off satisfactorily, and a large
amount of curiosity having been gratified on my side, I was now ready
to start for Amsterdam. A berth was secured on board the “Romona,”
and I left St. Katherine’s Wharf in tolerable spirits; but in passing
Southend and Sheerness I fell into a dejected mood, when I contrasted
my youthful longings with the present mercantile mission to Holland.
It was of no use, our interests with the Navy and Army authorities
had been neglected, the heads of the family had taken a more serious
turn, and it was absolutely necessary that I should do something for my
living.

On leaving the Nore and getting well out to sea, our passengers on
deck had wonderfully decreased; there was a stiff breeze on, and the
attendance at dinner fell short of the steward’s expectations. Those
who were equal to feeding became none the less sociable, and I was glad
to sit by the side of a communicative young merchant bound for the
Rhine. Among other topics, the subject of aërostation was broached by
my fellow-traveller; he, too, had seen the ascent of the great balloon,
and longed some day, like myself, to have an aërial excursion.

The more we got away from land, the stronger it came on to blow, in
fact we had a very dirty night of it, but crossed the bar all right
soon after daylight, and got up to Rotterdam about the time we were
expected. My brother John, who was there to meet me, proposed that
we should go to the Dutch capital by a canal boat: I was agreeably
surprised to find how fluently he could chat to the men, and with what
apparent ease he smoked an enormous pipe and drank black coffee.

After a week’s wandering about Amsterdam, I was introduced for the
first time into a counting-house. I made a great effort for some weeks
to take an interest in the proceedings and to do as I was requested,
but natural aptitude failed me. I did not take kindly to a single duty
and became conscious that I was looked upon as a dunce. A sharp bilious
attack followed my novitiate, and it was pretty evident that whatever
my element might be, I was not in it at that particular time and place.

As the long evenings came on, my brother used to read and translate the
newspapers.

About the second week in November he observed some intelligence which
was sure to please and excite me.

“Now, do pay attention, Henry,” he added, “Mr. Green has crossed the
Channel, with two other gentlemen, in the Vauxhall balloon, and landed
in Germany.”

“Read on, I am all attention John.”

I then heard the full particulars of that extraordinary voyage. The
result was a balloon fever, which was by no means suited to my position
at that time.

My brother and Herr von L---- observed in me a greater distaste
than ever to counting-house duties, and I was heartily glad when an
unexpected turn in our affairs was brought about, by which we were to
leave Amsterdam and return home.

A change of our family residence was the next movement of any
importance in my history. We had resolved upon going up to London. My
brother John was now provided for, and I was to watch his advancement,
and, if possible, follow in his steps, as there would be no difficulty
in getting a berth for me.

Eventually I tried my hand at it, but it was of no use; I sickened and
gave it up, much to the disappointment of my friends.

Whatever was to be done with me now? That, indeed, was a serious
question.

“I think,” said an observing acquaintance one evening, as he placed his
hand towards his mouth as if in the act of removing some artificial
teeth, “I have thought of an occupation that will suit Henry. This
morning,” he said, “I had occasion to visit my dentist, and he inquired
if I knew of any youth of a mechanical turn of mind who would like to
become his pupil.”

The idea was no sooner broached than it struck me as being in the right
direction.

I caught at it and agreed to turn it over in my mind, nor did I fail to
do so. Forthwith I waited upon several surgeon-dentists, and at last
had an interview with a very clever practitioner, who had formerly
been a surgeon in the navy. This gentleman was eminently calculated to
ingratiate himself, and to present to my notice the kind of work which
a dental student would have to perform.

It was not long before an agreement was drawn up, and I embarked in the
undertaking.

The right vein was here hit upon, it was thought. I set to with a
will, and ere many weeks had elapsed, I brought home such specimens of
workmanship as warranted the expectation that I should soon take to,
and excel in my new vocation.

As it happened, both departments of dental surgery became equally
attractive; that is the surgical as well as the mechanical. By the
time I was proficient and just of age, I became entitled to an amount
of cash, which enabled me to order a brass plate and commence business
with patients on my own account. I had to form a connection, however,
and to bide my time for the coming in of fees.

Unfortunately, perhaps, this uphill beginning left a deal of spare time
on my hands, so that ever and anon I required--or thought I did--a
little recreation.

In taking up a newspaper to see what was going on in the way of
rational amusement, I happened to observe an advertisement of an
intended balloon ascent by Mr. Hampton.

This notice, coupled with a desire for change, led me to decide upon an
outing. My taste for ballooning grew apace, and soon became a passion.
Whenever an ascent was advertised I was almost sure to be there, and,
as a strong liking for any adventurous and scientific calling leads to
acquaintance with kindred spirits, I became familiar with a number of
regular attendants at balloon _fêtes_, and soon acquired a reputation
for knowing as much--and some said more--than many of those who had
been brought up to it.

From my seventeenth up to my twentieth year I had seen most of the
aërostatic sights that had engaged public attention near London. I had
witnessed a balloon race from Vauxhall, and saw the aërial competitors
come in actual collision without doing injury. I had seen Mrs. Graham
ascend and her husband as well. I had seen the great Nassau balloon
before and after it took Messrs. Hollond, Green, and Mason to Germany,
as already described.

In the year 1837 I went into ballooning with a will, and my visits to
the balloon grounds were regular, but I was prevented from seeing Mr.
Cocking’s parachute attached to the great balloon, although I saw it
suspended in the air from London Bridge as it bore down Eltham way, and
was struck with its cumbrous and rigid convex form, so ill adapted,
I thought, to offer sufficient resistance, and to possess adequate
strength for reaching the ground in safety.

After the death of Mr. Cocking I saw Mr. Hampton descend in a parachute
from Bayswater, and this led to my becoming acquainted with that
gentleman some little time afterwards.

I was disappointed of an ascent with Mr. Hampton, as his balloon
“Albion,” which was rather small, would only take the aëronaut when I
wished to make my maiden ascent. This was the year (1837), a period
when I became a diligent student in aërostatics, and, it is not too
much to say, that I had shown similar application in dental surgery,
indeed I found that all I was called upon to learn was so easy and
pleasurable in acquisition that I made light of my duties, and failed
not to devote considerable attention to my hobby as well.

One day I met Mr. Hampton in Westminster, full of trouble and anxiety
at the way he had been treated by those who had reason, as he alleged,
to be his friends. We walked and talked together, entering upon a
chapter of misfortunes, which touched me much at the time, and induced
me not only to sympathize with him, but to use my best endeavours to
assist his cause.

There is no necessity for entering into the way in which he had lost
his balloon, suffice it to say that I did all I could to redeem it, and
in return the aëronaut took great pains to give me all the information
he could about aërostation, and he promised the moment he had a new
balloon to take me up with him, and he moreover presented me with a
good portrait of himself, the massive frame to which was made by Mr.
Hampton’s own hands. This intimacy, and the espousal of the aëronaut’s
cause, drew upon me the frowns of several persons connected indirectly
and professionally with ballooning.

Knowing some of Mr. Charles Green’s friends I was rather hankering to
see more of the air-captain, as the Germans style us, but I knew by
experience that “two of a trade seldom agree,” and I was naturally
reluctant to offend my patron by being intimate with Mr. Green, whose
fame was of long standing and very properly universal.

Circumstances soon brought us together, but on meeting I was impressed
with the belief that I was regarded as the advocate of an opposition
aëronaut, and not as one upon whom Mr. Green would lavish his
experience, or whom he would take up either as a paying passenger
or pupil. I was evidently considered a dangerous fellow, and as Mr.
Hampton had once stated that he thought I should one day become an
aëronaut, although at the time I had no serious intention of doing so,
this was quite sufficient to cause me to be shunned by all the family
of the Greens, or, if not exactly shunned, at least viewed with caution
and suspicion.

For three years I was in the habit of meeting Mr. Hampton and of
talking over ballooning, until I grew well nigh surfeited with the
tongue part of aërial voyaging, and longed for the reality, which
was delayed until the year 1844. Mr. Hampton was then enabled with
my assistance to start a new balloon, and I had an opportunity of
seeing the construction of it. His first engagement with this was at
the Old Vauxhall Gardens, in Birmingham, and thither I went to be his
companion, but, to my mortification, the balloon would not raise two
persons, so that I had to remain on terra firma, and suffer the taunts
of several spectators, who chose to attribute to motives of fear my
getting out of the car after having been once in for the ascent.

My third attempt was successful. Mr. Hampton was solicited to make an
ascent from the White Conduit Gardens, Pentonville, on Monday, August
19th, 1844, and I was without fail to accompany him.

Many years had elapsed since the ascent of a balloon from these famed
gardens; the attraction was accordingly very powerful.

The balloon was filled at the Imperial Gas Works, Battle-bridge, and
the car placed on a cart, to which it was secured by ropes; it was
conveyed to the gardens by six o’clock on Monday morning, an extra
supply of gas being provided to keep up the loss by condensation.

Before the public entered the grounds, it was rumoured by the
privileged few who were present that a _Mr. Wells_ was to be the
aëronaut’s companion, as that gentleman had recently been disappointed
at Birmingham. Some other persons, mentioning my name, declared that
Mr. Coxwell was to be the favoured party.

An appeal was then made to me for authentic information, and as I was
now within a stone’s throw of my residence in the Barnsbury Road,
Pentonville, where I had recently commenced practice, it was expedient
I should frankly declare that I had previously assumed the name of
Wells in order to prevent anxiety among my friends, and that the
candidate _Wells_ and the aspirant _Coxwell_ were one and the same
person.

This being understood, and the motives which actuated me in taking
upon myself an _alias_ being respected, Mr. Hampton, at six o’clock,
accompanied by Mr. Wells (as “the Illustrated News” recorded it),
stepped into the car, and the balloon rose in majestic style,
travelling easterly over the metropolis, and descended in a field
belonging to Mr. T. Rust, at East-ham Hall.

This, then, was my first real ascent; but such was the amount of
thought I had bestowed on the subject in previous imaginary flights,
built upon the descriptive accounts of others, that I seemed to be
travelling an element which I had already explored, although, in
reality, I was only for the first time realising the dreams of my
youth. In most respects I found the country beneath, including the busy
humming metropolis, the River Thames, shipping, and distant landscape,
pretty much as I expected, and had been tutored to see in the mind’s
eye; but the extraordinary and striking feature of this ascent was
the enchanting way in which these appearances unfolded themselves
in a manner so opposite to what one would picture by looking at a
balloon in the sky. This is owing to the peculiarly imperceptible way
in which a balloon rises, and herein consists the difference--the
delightful, fascinating difference--between heights accomplished by
balloon ascents, and altitudes attained by climbing hills, mountains,
monuments, and buildings. In Alpine travels the process is so slow, and
contact with the crust of the earth so palpable, that the traveller is
gradually prepared for each successive phase of view as it presents
itself; but in the balloon survey, cities, villages, and vast tracts
for observation spring almost magically before the eye, and change
in aspect and size so pleasingly, that bewilderment first, and then
unbounded admiration is sure to follow, and when one reflects that
all these wonderful panoramic effects are produced by the noiseless,
unobserved, ascension of the balloon, we are reminded of the motion of
the earth which rolls us round the glorious sun, and the heavenly orbs,
so that they, the sun, stars, and planets, appear to be rising and
setting.

It is just so with the balloon--a wide-spread carpet of variegated
country is changing form, hue, and dimensions, or rather appearing to
do so, as the observers rise and descend, and assume various elevations.

Our journey only lasted twenty-five minutes, but it seemed to me when
we descended that the balloon had not been more than five minutes in
the air. After we anchored I felt that it was a tantalising short-lived
piece of grandeur and only enough to whet the appetite for more.

But a second chance was at hand. Mr. Hampton had been asked to ascend
from Bromley, in Kent, where such an exhibition was quite a novelty.
The undertaking, however, was of too formidable a character for the
small gas-works and diminutive pipes in that locality. Visitors who
congregated in a meadow selected for the festivities were not gratified
with the ascent on the day it was announced to take place; consequently
fresh exertions had to be made in the production of gas, and not until
the following evening was the balloon fit to ascend, and, even then,
it would barely take two, so that I had another narrow escape of being
left behind after arranging to go. It was necessary to part with very
nearly all the ballast in order to rise.

We started sluggishly, but got up two thousand feet, and there had a
splendid view over the garden of England, as the county of Kent has not
inaptly been styled. Short and sweet was the order of this second trip
of mine, but, as we had a remarkably picturesque country to gaze upon,
I was much annoyed at not being longer aloft, and I don’t know but that
I vowed--at any rate the idea flashed through my mind--that I would
one day have a balloon of my own, even if it were for unprofessional
ascents, as these hasty, short views were most aggravating and by no
means worth the expense.

Shortly after my being thus initiated into practical ballooning, Mr.
Hampton undertook a tour to Ireland; but there, in Dublin, he had the
misfortune to descend near a house, the chimney of which was on fire,
and his balloon, blown in that direction by a sharp breeze, ignited,
but the aëronaut happily escaped with his life.

It was a long time before Mr. Hampton was in a condition to ascend
again. In the meantime other balloonists had made my acquaintance,
viz., Mr. Gypson, and Lieut. Gale, both of whom sought co-operation,
and frequently offered me seats in their cars, as some acknowledgment
for the advice and assistance I had rendered them.

Mr. C. Green invariably gave me the cold shoulder. I was rather
sensitive about this at the time, but in later years, when I began to
obtain a reputation for myself, I came to the conclusion that it was
the greatest compliment the greatest aëronaut of the day could award
me, inasmuch as it indicated that I was somebody to be studiously kept
in the background for an obvious purpose.

During the autumn of 1845, I projected and edited “The Balloon or
Aërostatic Magazine,” a publication designed to advance aërostation.
A good reception greeted the little serial on the part of the press,
but the demand for information on this subject was not equal to my
enthusiasm, and as a monthly repository of travels by air, it did not
pay, so that its periodical appearance was discontinued, and afterwards
it was only published occasionally.

In the year 1847, three new balloons were constructed by the aëronauts,
Green, Gale, and Gypson, respectively. Mr. Green, junr, also made one
about this time, intending to use it principally on the continent.

With two out of these four balloons, I had a great deal to do, as will
soon be seen.

Let us commence with Mr. Gypson’s, as it was the first on the stocks,
and the first to make a perilous ascent and descent. When this balloon
was finished, Mr. Gypson and myself determined upon a private ascent;
we desired a long trip, and would not even object to cross the Channel,
if the breeze should waft us in that direction. The Imperial Gas Works,
at Haggerston, in London, was the place we started from. The new
machine was taken there to be inflated on the day selected, which was
favourable, the wind being from the S.S.E., so that we had a long run
before us, and a good opportunity of reaching Scotland.

Owing to the close proximity of the balloon to the gas-holders,
the filling proceeded very rapidly; it appeared to me that the
inflation should be checked somewhat, but the aëronaut considered
his arrangements equal to any pressure that could be put on by Mr.
Clarke, the gas-engineer. It was soon evident that the network was not
liberated so quickly as it should have been; the consequence was that
a lateral and unequal strain began to be imparted, and just as I had
gone away to speak to some gentlemen who had arrived, by invitation,
the netting began to break towards the lower part, but the damage was
not apparently sufficiently serious to prevent the ascent being made.
We therefore got into the car, and notwithstanding several broken
meshes, prepared for a start, but while sitting in readiness, a sudden
gust drove the silk with considerable force towards the fractured
cordage, which continued breaking, until the lower part of the silken
bag protruded, and then, the entire balloon surged through the opening,
leaving the network behind, which dropped on our heads, so that the
balloon itself escaped, leaving us in the car to receive the ironical
congratulations of our friends, who had come to see us go up.

Not many seconds after the silken bag had bounded away, it split up,
and descended in a brickfield, not far distant. It is almost impossible
to imagine a more ridiculous position for expectant voyagers to be
placed in than this.

The assembled spectators pronounced it a mercy that we had not
ascended, and that the breakage had not happened in the air. They
believed we must have been killed had not the balloon escaped just when
it did; but I was of a different opinion, believing that if once we had
got away, no bad results would have occurred while we were travelling
aloft.

The balloon was forthwith repaired, and a second private attempt made
on March 18th in the same year. This time we had a successful day, and
came down all right at Hawkhurst, in Kent, not far from the residence
of Sir John Herschel. In the evening we were invited to Collingwood,
where we spent a most agreeable and instructive time with the eminent
astronomer.

Soon after this event Lieutenant Gale’s balloon was launched at the
Rosemary Branch Gardens, Peckham.

Here, too, I was invited, and almost persuaded to make the first trip;
but as I had condemned certain new fashioned valve-springs, which I
considered unsafe, I preferred to witness rather than participate in
the ascent. Mr. Gale wished also to use a pair of supplementary small
balloons to receive the expanded gas; but these, I thought, were open
to objection, so that I could not possibly join the lieutenant at the
time he was applying appurtenances, which I had pronounced dangerous.

The balloon, a very fine one, was duly filled, and the ascent nicely
made. A Mr. Burn took my place, and I was rather joked, I remember,
when the new balloon floated majestically in the still atmosphere.

Events, however, soon took a sudden turn. Gale had promised to travel
far down towards the coast, and had, it appeared, suddenly altered his
mind, as the balloon began descending fast.

“Perhaps,” said some one, “he has forgotten something as it is coming
down so soon, and will go up again and continue his journey.”

But the rate of descent increased so rapidly, that Mrs. Gale ran to me
and inquired anxiously for my opinion.

I was obliged in candour to say, as I was considered an authority,
that I feared the flat valve-springs had not quite answered Gale’s
expectation; “but he will be all right,” I said, encouragingly, “even
if he has a good bump.”

Ballast was soon observed to pour out profusely, and there was no doubt
of the voyagers being sensible of the frightful pace at which they were
coming down. The lower part of the balloon was seen to contain no gas,
so that its collapsed condition was visible to everyone present.

Several persons started off to see the cause of so sudden a descent. As
to myself I remained with Mrs. Gale, making light of what really looked
serious, in order to allay her alarm.

A messenger soon arrived to say that neither the aëronaut nor his
companion were seriously hurt, but that they alighted with terrific
force at Peckham Rye, owing to the valve-springs not having acted
properly.

Gale, himself, soon put in an appearance, inquiring for me. He said,
“You are quite right as to those springs; I will abandon them, and you
shall ascend next time.”

It was not long before I did so.

Pleasure gardens in and about London were rather numerous in the
year ’47, and the Royal Albert Grounds, near Hoxton, were just in
their palmy days. It was here I made the next ascent with Lieut.
Gale, and one or two with Mr. Gypson also; but as these gentlemen
were competitors for aëronautic fame, I was constantly risking the
displeasure of both by not adhering entirely to one.

During the same summer I made a variety of aërial journeys with each of
these aëronauts, but, two especially, were connected with considerable
personal risk.

The first was with Lieut. Gale, when we descended in a rough wind in
Gloucestershire, after having started from Bristol.

A new fangled grapnel was used in this trip, and one ill adapted for
arresting the progress of a balloon in a strong wind. It was on the
ball and socket principle; but the socket, which was of brass, was
inside the crown of the prongs. I prophesied before any strain was
thrown upon the grapnel that it would break. It did so in trailing over
a field, when the balloon dashed into a large oak tree, cutting asunder
a thick branch, which ripped the silk from bottom to top, so that the
gas escaped instantly, and we pitched to leeward of the tree with no
trifling concussion, by the way, but got no broken bones or serious
injury.

The second affair was, without doubt, the most perilous descent in the
annals of aërostation.

In the year 1847, the far-famed Vauxhall had not altogether lost its
_prestige_; but still, exciting amusements were indispensable to its
continued existence, and aëronautics had enjoyed long-continued popular
favour in that establishment. But a nocturnal voyage with fireworks
displayed under the balloon, was not of frequent occurrence, and a
night ascent with Mr. Gypson’s balloon was decided upon as an opportune
attraction.

My own seat in the car was owing to special invitation on the part of
the proprietor, but two other candidates--viz. Mr. Albert Smith and
Mr. Pridmore, only secured places on the afternoon of the ascent.

Mr. Albert Smith at that time was a popular writer; and, as he had
already made a day ascent, he wished to see London by night, and to
give an account of it to the public.

When the balloon was filled during the afternoon, in the Waterloo
Grounds, the air was calm and hot, with every prospect--as far as
appearances went--of a fine summer evening. It was just the sort of
weather for an aërial journey in the dark, there was no rustling
of leaves, or wild gusts to induce the least apprehension of a
disagreeable landing.

The inflation was completed with the utmost ease, and just before the
variegated Vauxhall lamps were lighted, a circular framework, with
Darby’s fireworks attached, was duly placed in position, so that it
could be fixed on when the moment arrived for starting.

About this time it was observed that the atmosphere became oppressive,
and that a threatening murky mist arose in the east; not long
afterwards, distant thunder rumbled, and people began to scan the
firmament, as if it looked uninviting, and as if the terrestrial
sight-seers would be safer that night than the air explorers. As for
us, we drew together and exchanged opinions, like mariners before
leaving a port when dirty weather was looming on the horizon.

The lessee of Vauxhall Gardens, Mr. Robert Wardell, having noticed
lightning playing over the city, came forth, with other interested
parties, to look around him; and soon a grave discussion was going on
near the car, for the storm was fast brewing, and there was doubt as to
whether it would be safe to venture. In the midst of great diversity
of opinion, a direct appeal was made to me, and I gave it in as my
conviction that, if the ascent were made quickly, and everything well
managed, there need be no apprehension.

The fireworks--weighing over 60 lbs.--were now connected, and gentlemen
were requested to jump in; for my own part, I decided upon jumping up
on the hoop, so as to see the neck clear, and report to Mr. Gypson when
the upper valve required opening.

I had never made a night ascent previously, but had formed my own
opinions as to the particular line of action desirable, and especially
under existing circumstances, when the air was highly charged with
electricity, and when a large amount of weight was about to be lost
owing to the combustion of the fireworks.

We left in grand style. A salvo of garden artillery announced the
slip of the cable, and the most beautiful red and green fires changed
the hue of the silken globe as it rose over the heads of the people;
and just as these grew faint the aërial pyrotechnics burst forth, and
the cheers rose lustily as each device engaged attention--for every
piece was artistically arranged; and when the Roman candles shot out
their many-coloured stars, and petards burst with a crashing sound,
and golden and silver showers enlivened the darkness of mid-air, every
spectator seemed to be in ecstacy; nor was there a single shout of
dissatisfaction or fear, until nature--as if displeased with man’s
efforts to light up the elements--broke out in apparent discontent; and
a wide-spread flash, with deep-toned thunder overhead, arrested public
admiration, and produced a death-like pause, both with us in the car
and those on the earth--all of whom had seen us enveloped, apparently,
in a flame of fire.

Our own feelings at this critical period can very well be imagined.
We were now some 4000 feet high, in a storm of thunder and lightning,
our fireworks were hardly spent and the balloon was mounting rapidly
and was fully distended, so that close watching, and a proper line of
action, could alone secure our safety.

When, after another flash or two, the gas rushed out of the safety
valve, I looked at Mr. Gypson, wondering how he intended to act, and it
was not long before I came to the conclusion that the upper valve ought
to be opened so as to remove a visible strain on the lower hemisphere
of the balloon. Had _I_ seized the line and opened the valve I should
most assuredly not have done wrong, but I simply, by pointing and
hinting, endeavoured, with too much deference, to persuade him to do as
I thought expedient.

He was not, evidently, quite of the same way of thinking as myself; at
last I cried out, “if the valve is not opened the balloon will burst.”

Hardly had I uttered the warning when the car appeared to drop suddenly
some six or eight feet beneath the balloon.

We all looked up, of course, affrighted, thinking that the netting was
giving way at the top, and Mr. Albert Smith was impressed with the
idea that I had pulled the valve line, and broken the framework; but
on looking upwards the sparks from the expiring fireworks, aided by a
flash of lightning, disclosed the awful fact that the balloon had rent
fully sixteen feet, and that we were falling headlong right over the
west end of London, with myriads of gas lamps beneath us, and houses in
such close proximity, that death stared us all in the face, and seemed
inevitable.

Situated as I was, on the hoop, with a better opportunity of observing
the torn silk and network than the rest, I noticed after the first
shock to the nerves, that the line which connected the neck of the
balloon was unduly tightened, and it immediately occurred to me if I
cut that, the lower part of the balloon would the more readily form a
resisting surface or parachute.

Much against the wishes of my companions I severed this cord, and a
check was soon observable, but the sparks from the paper cases shot up
among the gas through the tear in the silk, and once more the thunder
roared, and lightning flashed, so that a more frightful descent to the
earth could not possibly be imagined.

As the gas-lit metropolis appeared to come up towards us--for, strange
as it may seem, there was no sense of giddiness or dropping--we
collected the ballast bags and disconnected the grapnel rope in order
to let them go just as we came in contact with the ground.

Fortunately, or rather say providentially, the balloon fell in a newly
formed street in the Belgrave Road, Pimlico, while the network caught
in some scaffold poles, which helped to break the force of collision.

Only one of the four of us was hurt, and that was myself, who received
a cut in the hand from a bystander while he was trying to let us out of
the network, which fell over our heads when the car touched the road.

Albert Smith and Mr. Pridmore lost no time in going back to Vauxhall
Gardens to assure people of our safety; but the general public were
not aware of the accident, although some few, who narrowly watched the
course of the balloon, noticed that it appeared to be falling quickly
and surrounded with sparks.

Almost the first person Albert Smith was said to have encountered on
entering Vauxhall, was his brother, who looked amazed at seeing him,
but observed a certain pallor and other indications of something being
out of order.

“Good gracious, Albert,” he said, “I could have declared I saw you go
in the balloon.”

“So you did,” was the reply, “don’t be alarmed, an accident happened,
but no one is hurt. Come and tell Mr. Wardell particulars.”

After Mr. Gypson and I had returned with the luggage on top of a cab,
a consultation was held as to the cause of the rupture; one thought
the valve was broken, and another that the balloon was struck with the
electric fluid, but the proprietor, as well as myself, knew the precise
cause of the burst, and when an examination was made on the following
morning, the valve line was found not to have been pulled, so the rent
could clearly have been prevented had the valve been opened in time.

Divested in this way of a great deal of the horror associated with the
stormy state of the weather, the accident assumed a more simple and
comprehensible form.

No wonder, therefore, that after talking these points over, Mr. Gypson
and I agreed, that in order to demonstrate that the balloon was not
wanting in strength, it would be well to make another ascent by night
with fireworks. Mr. Albert Smith was again invited, but a certain
pressure, exercised perhaps wisely, by his friends prevented him from
ascending again.

Mr. Pridmore, too, although as brave as need be, did not join us; but
that very night week, with double the weight of fireworks, we ascended
again with the restored balloon, and this time all went well, and we
came down at Acton, having with us a third voyager, in the person of a
captain, who had accompanied us under circumstances characteristic of
an Englishman, and, perhaps, worth narrating.

Some little time before starting the said captain applied for a seat
in the car, and I was asked to negotiate for him, in doing which I
thought it but right to explain that an accident had happened the week
previously and that Mr. Gypson was by no means desirous of taking a
third person on the present occasion.

After I had again alluded in unmistakable terms to the perilous
descent, the captain, in no way discouraged, said:

“Well sir, you are taking a great deal of trouble to inform me of that
which is patent to everybody who reads, but I suppose the odds are that
to-night there will be no smash.”

“Just so,” I added encouragingly, when the gallant gentleman stepped
forward and took his place.

After the balloon was packed up at Acton I fancied that our companion
looked as if he was happy and self-satisfied, he begged of us to go
with him to his club, adding that he could well afford to offer an
entertainment as he had made a wager of one hundred pounds that he
would ascend that night, a decided opinion having prevailed at his club
that he dare not do so, as a terrible catastrophe would be sure to take
place, and so thought the public apparently, for Vauxhall was filled
to such an extent that the garden officials described the crowd as so
thick that one might have walked on people’s heads.

During the winter of 1847 Lieutenant Gale found that the expenses
of establishing himself in popular favour were heavier than he had
anticipated. He was associated with two other gentlemen in the
proprietorship of his balloon, but his individual responsibilities
caused a split, so that the aëronaut and his partners separated.

When Gale lost or threw up all controlling power over the balloon,
the then sole owners having as they said a considerable amount of
confidence in my judgment, called upon me, and proposed that as I had
ascended so frequently and had encountered so many dangers, that I
should make a series of ascents on my own and on their account, and
that if I would manage the balloon that was styled Gale’s, but which
was really theirs, I should have every facility for doing so, as Gale
would have nothing more to do with it.

Such a thought never having entered my head, and being moreover
engaged as a dentist, I at once declined, but not without explaining
that my relatives had always discountenanced my balloon ascents, and
would raise most positively a great outcry if ever my name appeared in
a public capacity as a professed aëronaut.

Shortly after this refusal we again met in company with several of the
admirers of aërostation, and whether by design or casual conversation
I know not, but certain it was that gossip turned upon my former
aërial adventures, and upon the advisability of my making it at once
a business affair as well as a pastime. All the arguments I raised
against the proposal were swept away by overwhelming opinions as to my
aptitude and so forth.

“Look,” said one, “you are certainly risking your life without any
profit, and the chances are you frequently dip your hand pretty deeply
into your pocket minus any return.”

“Again,” said another, “look at the hair-breath escapes you have had,
perhaps if you were to run alone these would be diminished.”

“And then,” suggested a third, “by being your own pilot you might
attain to success and honour.”

This last inducement proved more weighty and seductive than the two
former, and when the question was simply put whether if I would mind
a run over to Brussels, just to put them right there for one or two
ascents, I consented, but had no idea at the time that I was doing an
act which would lead to my becoming a practical balloonist.

In the spring of 1848, therefore, I agreed to manage the said balloon,
but before ascending I christened it the “Sylph,” and that word was
painted three times in giant characters round the equator, so that
wherever it appeared, or whichever way it turned, the name was always
prominent.

My first ascent, as director in the Belgian capital, was to take place
in the month of May, but a voyage by private arrangement was set on
foot by way of a trial trip, and one of the owners, a Mr. S----, was to
entrust his life to my care, and we were to go whither the winds blew
us, on a sort of pleasure trip. The “Sylph” received a good supply of
gas at the Independent Gas-works at Haggerston, London, on April 10th;
early in the afternoon we ascended, and after being nearly three hours
aloft came down near Colchester, passing directly over the county town
of Essex.

This led on our way back to a call at Chelmsford, and as I knew several
persons in that town who now learnt that I was commanding officer of
the good craft “Sylph,” nothing would satisfy them but getting up an
ascent there, and although I was averse to any undertaking of the sort
in England, still I was over persuaded, and the rumour rapidly gained
circulation that I should make a public ascent from the gas-yard of
the town shortly, and that as it would be the first thing of the kind
from Chelmsford for seventeen years, the inhabitants would hail such an
exhibition with much pleasure and good attendance.

The first of my two ascents from this town took place April 28th, 1848.
The weather was not exactly propitious, for the morning rose somewhat
sulky.

  “And her sick head was bound about with clouds,
   As if she threatened night e’er noon of day.”

In this state of things, a postponement was contemplated, but soon
after midday, the sun, “of this great world the eye and soul,”
scattered the clouds and revived the preparations; there was, in fact,
a complete revolution in the weather, and the curious began to gather
in and take up their positions, while the bright eyes of many Essex
ladies were directed, not to the six points of Chartism, just then
famous, but to the one point where the silken craft towered above
the adjoining buildings, as it was influenced by the breeze in the
gas-works.

The visitors having been treated with a series of partial ascents, at
six o’clock the balloon rose. In the car were Mr. Chas. Livermore, of
Felstead, and Mr. Isaac Livermore, of Dunmow, together with Mr. Church,
the engineer of the gas-works.

We were greeted in our course by thousands of applauding voices--

  “Followed far by many a wond’ring eye,
   They glide majestic ’twixt the earth and sky.”

The “Sylph” took a direction over the Hanning fields, and ultimately
descended near Rettendon Common.

On May the 5th, a second illustration was made from the same locality.
This time the atmosphere had all the sunshine and softness of balmy
spring, the visitors were far more numerous than on the former
occasion, and the reserved seats were filled principally with ladies,
many of them from the leading families of the neighbourhood.

Captive ascents were found to be impracticable this day, but at length
Mr. Ram, of Newland Hall, with two other gentlemen entered the car,
and we mounted over the irregular forces who garrisoned the housetops
in rapid style, and moved towards the Roothings.

Strange to say, the descent was made near Good Easter, where Mr. Ram
lived, and here I kept the balloon all night; the following morning,
soon after sunrise, I began taking people up, the length of the
cable, and after breakfast Mr. Ram’s daughters had a panoramic view
of the Hall and Park; the elder young lady would fain have ascended
altogether, but papa had made up his mind to do so once more himself,
so that soon after 11 o’clock we started again with the same gas, and
after being up nearly an hour, descended at Forth-end, near Felstead.

Before starting from the gas-works, on the 5th instant, I made the
following estimate of the weight of the “Sylph” and its appendages:--

  Balloon, netting, and car     400 lbs.
  Mr. Ram                       160  ”
  Two other gentlemen           304  ”
  Myself                        148  ”
  Grapnel and rope               52  ”
  Coats, instruments, &c.        30  ”
  Ballast                       160  ”
                              ----------
                Total          1254 lbs.
                              ==========

being the weight which 32,000 feet of carburetted hydrogen gas would
sustain at a specific gravity of about 440.

The temperature of the air on the earth was sixty-two degrees; at the
greatest altitude, viz., three-quarters of a mile, forty-nine degrees.
Temperature of gas on the earth, as obtained by placing a thermometer
in the neck, sixty-three degrees; ditto in mid-air, forty-four degrees.
Force of expansion, as indicated by the pressure gauge, 5·10, or half
an inch; rate of travelling, twenty miles an hour; direction of wind,
N.W.

About the middle of the merry month of May Mr. S---- and I formed part
of a group of passengers at London Bridge Wharf, on our way to the
Antwerp steam-boat.

Everybody but ourselves was looking after the porters and their
luggage. We appeared to be gazing at the clouds, but were in reality
watching a large wicker basket which was suspended some thirty feet
under a crane, and was ready to be swung in on deck directly the mate
saw all clear below, and sung out “lower away.”

This basket, owing to its unusual size, attracted general attention,
a bystander, who took it for a large bread basket, observed that the
passengers would be well off for the “staff of life,” even if they
lacked delicacies. But the interest taken in the huge basket rather
increased than diminished when the mate, a little angry with the
seamen, cried out “bear a hand there, stow away that balloon.”

“Belongs to you Sir?” added the officer, directing a patronizing glance
towards me, whereupon a hundred eyes or more followed suit, and my
connection with the supposed bread basket was established beyond the
shadow of a doubt. Assuming, rather than feeling, the required amount
of nerve to endure this introduction to the ship’s crew, I nodded an
affirmative, and tried to suppress a rush of blood to the cheek, but
it would not do. I looked ashamed of this branch of publicity, and
proposed to go below and see after our berths.

The first person I met in the chief cabin was an acquaintance, but glad
enough was I to find that he had not noticed our luggage, and what
was more, that he was merely seeing a friend off to the continent. No
sooner had we deposited our portmanteaus in the sleeping berths than
I proposed to go on deck again, whispering to my friend as we went up
the companion ladder, “out of the frying-pan into the fire.” “That
gentleman,” I added, “knows my family well, and I would rather not be
identified with the big basket so uncommonly close to London Bridge.”

“That’s all a matter of taste,” observed Mr. S---- consolingly, “many
men would be proud of the position.”

“But you know I am not, and you are aware of my reasons for not caring
about being thought a professional aëronaut.”

“All right Mr. Coxwell, take it quietly and pass for an amateur.”

The vessel had not rounded the Isle of Dogs when we found ourselves in
earnest conversation with an elderly gentleman, who was much interested
in aërostation. It came out, too, that he had ascended himself, and
that he was intimate with some of the aëronautic celebrities of the
present century.

“Do you know,” said our communicative fellow-traveller, “I never could
thoroughly understand the cause of the fatal descent of that poor man
Cocking; being abroad at the time I had not the opportunity of keeping
pace with our home newspapers.”

In reply I said, “You are aware that the principle of his parachute was
diametrically opposite to Garnerin’s, which had descended successfully.
Cocking’s was a sort of inverted cone, while that previously employed
was more like an umbrella turned upside down with a weight appended to
the stick.”

“Exactly,” said our intelligent acquaintance, “and the tendency of a
rush of air was not to collapse but rather to keep it distended.”

I fully agreed, and added that “Two objectionable circumstances
attended the use of Garnerin’s parachute, namely, the length of time
which elapsed before it expanded, and the violent oscillating movement
which accompanied the descent. In order to obviate these deficiencies
a variety of plans had been proposed at different times, amongst which
was that of Cocking’s.” The inverted cone principle, however, was not
an idea originating with Cocking, although he had lectured on the
subject in 1814 before the Society of Arts.

“Towards the end of the last century this kind of parachute was
proposed in Paris, and revived by Sir George Cayley, and again more
fully developed by Mr. Kerr in the Encyclopædia Edinensis.”

“Pray,” inquired our friend, “do you happen to know the weight and
diameter of Cocking’s parachute?”

“Yes; the computations which appeared in the public press, previous to
the inquest, were loose and incorrect. They were to the effect that the
entire weight was 393 lbs., whereas, from the evidence taken before
the coroner, it appeared that the apparatus weighed 413 lbs., and Mr.
Cocking 170 lbs. The terminal velocity, therefore, would have been
nearly twenty feet in a second had the parachute not collapsed. Its
diameter was thirty-four feet.”

“Of course one of smaller dimensions on the concave plan would descend
less rapidly?”

“Oh, certainly a parachute on the Garnerin principle would bring a man
down at the rate of twenty feet in a second, even if it were fifteen
feet in diameter.”

“According to the most reliable tables of atmospheric resistances, a
weight of one pound under a square foot of sustaining surface would
cause it to descend at the rate of 1320 feet per second, or fifteen
miles an hour.”

“But as this is a far greater rate than is consistent with safety, the
diameter should be at least twenty-five feet.”

“Then how is it that scientific men and practical aëronauts did not
point out these faults?”

“They did; but poor Cocking was so confident and determined, that no
sooner was a large balloon built by the Vauxhall proprietors, Messrs.
Gye and Hughes, than he proposed appending a parachute to it, and he
threatened in the event of refusal, to construct another balloon and
offer opposition to Vauxhall.”

“Indeed, and I have no doubt that pecuniary inducements had their
weight. But what did Mr. Green say?”

“Green, to do him justice, never liked the experiment, and he has been
heard to say since, that for no amount of money would he repeat his
experience on July 24th, 1837.”

“He is said at first to have declined to connect his name with it, but
he was bound to ascend with the great balloon when called upon by the
proprietors, as there was a legal difficulty in evading the ascent.”

“It has been suggested, and with some show of practicability, that
he might by stratagem have brought Cocking down without allowing him
to descend with his parachute alone, but Mr. Green distinctly stated
on the other hand, that his individual impression was, that having
withstood the pressure of the atmosphere in the ascent, the parachute
would go down safely.”

“What with the danger to Mr. Green and his companion, Mr. E. Spencer,
owing to the loss of so great a weight, it is evident that it was an
ill-judged affair from first to last.”

“Most decidedly. Now please to tell me where this frail structure gave
way.”

“The upper circle was made only of tin hooping, soldered together, and
this broke before even the ascent was made.”

“It transpired, afterwards, that Cocking in all probability twisted the
cord round his wrist, the better to enable him to effect his liberation
by pulling hard at the trigger; in so doing it is conjectured that he
was jerked against the smaller circle at the apex of the cone, and that
his own body produced a fracture in the framework, which added to its
weakness.”

“This concussion may have deprived him of sensibility as well, a wound
found on his temple tends to confirm this view of the catastrophe.”

Thus ended our dissertation on parachutes; but long ere our further
chat had ceased, we had approached the mouth of Father Thames, where a
fresh breeze and a lively motion caused many passengers to go below,
and others to obey the steward’s call to dinner. _We_ responded, and
went through not only the ceremony, but the enjoyment of, a generous
repast, without feeling indisposed. On landing at Antwerp an Englishman
presented himself on the quay, whom we took, and rightly so, for a
gentleman who had entered into the balloon speculation at Brussels, and
who had in consequence engaged my services to ascend.

He was a red-haired, gaunt person, extremely short-sighted, and wore
a cap and close-fitting dress-coat, which had seen more sunny days
and was conspicuously short in the sleeves. But, notwithstanding his
optical infirmity, he was a match for the sharpest porter, and by tact
he was soon up with the steward and ascertained our names and errand
with astonishing sharpness.

In introducing himself, he brought his hand down upon the great basket,
or balloon car, with some degree of familiarity, saying, “Well, here
you are,” as if he had been intimately acquainted with us previously.

It was, however our first meeting, and was essentially of a business
character, but anything like a stiff commercial view of this
preliminary interview was soon removed by a jaunty nonchalance on his
part. He then drew out a showy cigar case, and almost immediately
replaced it, saying, “Wait a bit, we will go over to the hotel and
breakfast first,” which we decided to do, after his perceiving that the
cigar case was empty.

All doubt being then removed, Mr. S---- and I looked at each other, as
much as to say, perhaps he is a capital fellow, notwithstanding his
manner, looks, and short-comings.

After refreshment, our long-haired short-sighted, short-sleeved
countryman proposed, or rather peremptorily decided upon pushing on to
Brussels forthwith.

Matters were not quite so forward as he could wish, and although
the ascent was positively announced, and the king had promised his
patronage, still there was much to be done, and for his part he had
quite lost faith in Frenchmen and Belgians. What all this meant, we
could only surmise and think over privately.

On arriving at Brussels we found that the intended balloon ascent had
received such careless attention, that the prospect of its taking place
on the day announced was doubtful in the extreme.

It seemed that a company had been formed to carry out this little
enterprise, and that one Frenchman, two Belgians, a Dutchman, and
an Englishman, had united their abilities and purses to put it into
execution.

The Englishman was clearly neither the treasurer nor principal. The
Frenchman had chiefly to do with the Prado Gardens, whence the “Sylph”
was to rise; and whether the Dutchman or the Belgians were the sleeping
partners, or the capitalists, they deposed not, nor could we gather,
although it soon became evident that the relative positions of each
member of so complicated an association, required to be well and at
once understood by me, before proceeding further in the matter.

I said, therefore, to the British representative of this amalgamated
balloon company, that I was under the impression I was purely and
solely engaged by the lessee of the Prado to make these ascents, and
that he was a well-to-do and competent proprietor.

“So I thought,” observed the seedy Englishman.

“It appears to me that there are a prodigious number of cooks to
prepare this simple mess of broth, and I tell you candidly,” I
continued, “that unless the cash for the first ascent, and the
requisite supply of gas are forthcoming within twenty-four hours I
shall retire from Brussels but not without publicly alleging as a
reason, that I have been deceived by the party inviting us to come
over.”

On due inquiry, I ascertained that no pipes had been brought into the
gardens of adequate size for the inflation, and that it was intended,
without my approval or consent, to accomplish that all important task
at a distant gas-works, outside the capital, and then before daybreak,
to pass it over the housetops, and finally deposit it in the Prado,
until such time as the public had assembled.

Now, although this process is one which I have frequently accomplished
under favourable circumstances as to wind and locality, still to drag
a balloon through Brussels, and risk its contact with high houses and
chimneys, was an injudicious beginning, and I protested emphatically,
and indeed declined it altogether.

I had, however, stood out, according to the letter of my own request,
for cash and a supply of gas, and these terms, after no small
altercation, were agreed to.

The cash was to be paid just when my part of the contract was about to
be fulfilled; but the gas could not be delivered in the gardens, as the
cost would be enormous, no such large pipes as those required being in
the neighbourhood.

When the Englishman, with short sleeves and sight, first wrote to us in
London, I was assured that “all the customary facilities for filling
balloons would be found in the Vauxhall of Brussels,” and “that no
doubt or hesitation need be felt on that score.”

But surely such discordant bickerings and confusion of languages, as we
had, never before preceded the arrangements for this kind of work.

There was no money, no head, no gas, and no order in any step that had
been taken, until I personally superintended the whole affair.

A certain amount of pressure and decision, however, brought this
heterogeneous mixture of nationalities entirely to book, but they _had
me_ on one point, and at a tremendous advantage, namely, I was driven
to fill the “Sylph” at the gas-works, and endeavour to transport it
through the town.

This attempt was made in May, 1848, and on that occasion grey-eyed morn
broke in with a high dawn and a reddish sky, an appearance which was
interpreted as being very fine by those who assembled for an exciting
view before breakfast.

We soon beat to quarters, as nautical men say, and, although we had
“time by the forelock,” we were none too soon, as I was most anxious
to be moving before the morning breezes were astir; and, though I had
little time for noticing the barometer, still I had observed a decided
drop, and did not altogether admire present appearances.

No sooner was the gas turned on than the “Sylph” began to display its
proportions satisfactorily, and the lookers on threw themselves into
various postures indicative of approbation.

“_Ah! Monsieur Coxvel_,” said one of the party, stroking down his
beard, “_you vil hav vun vary fine day; no vind, no nothink. Your
transport vil no be difficile._”

Hereupon I glanced around the horizon, but returned the weather wise
Belgian no reply. He then looked with such a scrutinizing glance, as to
provoke an expression of discontent.

“_Ah! vat you mean_,” inquired he, “_vy you frown?_”

The fact was, a small solitary, dark-looking cloud had made its
appearance to the westward; and, although a goodly distance off, was
wending its way up with great rapidity. The configuration of this
little intruder on the blue sky was such as to forbode wind.

“Gentlemen,” said I to those who were helping, “there is a fresh wind
springing up, at no great distance from the earth, and if it does not
extend downwards before reaching the gardens, we may consider ourselves
fortunate.”

Several bystanders protested against the probability of this, and
discussed the matter with flourishing action of the hands and much
useless talk.

The Frenchman and the English agent grew quite warm as they expressed
opposite views about the matter; but the Dutchman, who was one of the
party, avowed his firm belief that squally weather was approaching,
and the way in which he gave a furtive and semi-nautical glance above,
showed at once that he shared my opinions and fears.

Our attention was directed as quickly as possible to securing the net
lines to the hoop, so as to get a fair and equal bearing from a strong
centre, and we had just completed this necessary precaution, when the
long grass around us bent to leeward with a low, murmuring sound, and
in less than half-an-hour after the first symptoms of an approaching
gale, one fitful gust broke upon us, creating, as it acted upon the
partially-filled balloon, a flapping, blustering sort of music, which
only loud Boreas is accustomed to indulge in.

Around the hoop and in the car were placed about forty
half-hundredweights, in order to steady the restless machine, which on
being filled and let up to the extent of the netting rolled round in
graceful sweeps over our heads.

The manager of the gardens, a sturdy Frenchman, was for a precipitate
dash through the city, regardless of all risk, but the adventurous
Englishman asked “How would Monsieur act if the balloon were his own
property?”

“_Vat you vil do?_” said the military looking Belgian, who promised us
“_no vind, no nothink_.”

“Why Sir,” I replied, “the fact is we have to contend with a most
formidable opponent, and I think we can’t do better than act purely on
the defensive, the assaults of this strong wind are quite as much as
the balloon can bear, and if we attempt to charge in the teeth of the
wind we shall only be repulsed, perhaps with heavy loss.”

As there appeared to be some doubt about the correctness of my views,
which required translation, I ordered a general move forward, by way
of demonstrating whether it were possible to keep on or whether it was
better to lay-to until the wind dropped.

Our forces, so to speak, were thus divided:--twenty burly mechanics
at the car, six to each guy-rope, about thirty to two ropes fastened
to the hoop with a view of pulling the balloon along, myself in the
car giving directions, the Englishman, whose sleeves were shorter than
ever, at my right acting as interpreter, Mr. S---- on my left pulling
for example’s sake; the manager of the Prado public garden, with
subordinates, and small fry, were at their posts shouting vociferously,
and thereby confounding the interpreter.

Away we marched, to the infinite delight of the Frenchmen, for a few
steps right bravely, but suddenly, flap, round, up, down, went the
“Sylph,” upsetting several of the party, and at last we were driven
further back than we had actually advanced, which proved sufficient to
convince everybody present as to who was right and who were wrong.

We now essayed to move laterally towards a somewhat sheltered spot, but
here a fresh difficulty soon presented itself in the shape of a file of
soldiers, who drew up near the balloon. An officer then advanced and
summoned me to his presence.

There was something decidedly ominous in the undertoned conversation
betwixt the officer and myself. I could perceive that all persons
present preserved silence, and displayed a large amount of curiosity to
ascertain what was going to happen.

The effect of the wind, which was gradually increasing, was not so
apparent when the “Sylph” was sheltered behind some trees as it was
previously, when each blast came upon us in its full fury, without
break or hindrance. I therefore betook myself to the car and stowed
away the sand-bags, getting rid of some half-hundredweights in their
stead. Lastly I attached my liberating iron to the hoop, and passed
into the hands of the workmen a rope connected therewith, which they
were requested to hold, and I then informed the assistants that I
wished to learn what ascending power the gas had, to effect which it
would be necessary to allow the car to rise once or twice a few feet
above the ground.

I noticed that the Belgians, Dutchman, and Frenchman, who were most
interested in these proceedings, stood aloof in earnest conversation.
Quite unexpectedly I found a pair of long hands and bare wrists over
the side of the car, and before I could make the first trial with the
balloon the Englishman, although short-sighted be it remembered, had
vaulted in by my side, without explaining himself or asking of me
an explanation, but I guessed when I put out a few bags of sand to
equalize his weight that he knew as much of my real intentions as I did
myself.

The moment I found the balloon had a buoyant tendency, I suddenly and
unexpectedly pulled the trigger, when away went the “Sylph” with a
bound, allowing the holders of the rope to go head-over-heels, and
everybody else to be seized with the conviction that the balloon had
broken away from its moorings.

My intrepid companion was not long in convincing me that he overheard
the officer’s secret request, which was, that “owing to the then
unsettled state of political affairs persons were not allowed to
collect in numbers in the public thoroughfare, and that if I found it
impossible to reach the Prado, the authorities requested that I would
let out the gas and stop the proceedings.”

“In what way did you pledge yourself to the official?” asked my
countryman, as he looked down upon the receding knot of astonished
spectators beneath.

“Just allow me to let off a little gas, and I will tell you; we are
rising fast notwithstanding our rapid movement forward. Replying to
your question then, I merely promised the officer that the balloon
should be removed with all possible expedition. It is not likely that
I was going to haul down my colours, or in other words, to let out the
gas without ascending.”

“But my partners in this speculation, the Frenchman and the others,
will hardly comprehend this hasty exit.”

“Indeed they will,” I replied, “the officer will surely intimate his
instructions, and my own way of executing his orders will not be
displeasing in the long run.”

“What a magnificent view of fair Brussels, but how insignificant in
size. Look at the Tower of Malines.”

“And far beyond,” I added, “you can see Antwerp.”

“I knew by your preparations you were going to ascend.”

“Did you,” I observed, “well, I told no one of my intentions, not even
Mr. S----, I thought it would be better to clear off first and explain
afterwards. It would have been useless to keep the balloon where it
was, and I have no doubt the friends with whom you are connected will
appreciate my motives by and bye.”

“We are now passing over a village,” said my companion, “which I have
just recognised, and you will be astonished to hear that we are least
sixteen miles from Brussels, and that we have not been up more than a
quarter of an hour.”

“I am not surprised at our rate of travelling, but rather at your good
sight in picking out a place well known to you.”

“Ah,” said the Englishman, “mine is a long sight, you will hardly
believe that I command the entire panoramic view as clearly as you do;
for instance, do you see anything besides those microscopic dots in
that green patch? I mean anything besides the cows which graze in the
meadows to the right of the farm-house.”

I looked attentively, and just detected a number of ducks, chiefly
white ones, on the banks of a pond, but should not have noticed them
unless I had examined minutely.

“How far do you suppose those insignificant specks are down?”

“I should guess 3000 feet, but not having my instruments I cannot
accurately ascertain our height or the temperature of the air; indeed,
we have little time even for landscape viewing, as I suppose we
both wish to make Brussels again to-night, there to account for our
unceremonious flight.”

I now let off some gas, and in a few minutes we found ourselves
travelling with considerable velocity across a large common, where
there were canals and banks in which the grapnel was likely to get hold.

I prepared my companion for a rough landing, telling him he must not
mind it, as it was his own seeking.

To do him justice he seemed to like the aërial mode of transit, and
when the iron took in a water-course and hung fast in the bank, causing
the balloon and car to roll over, and then to break away again, he
became conscious of the terrible force of the wind, and prepared for a
succession of bumps and shocks.

We were soon trailing along towards another canal, the car keeping just
clear of the ground, when I found that it was a good spot to catch in,
and begged my fellow-traveller to keep fast and look out for squalls.
Fortunately this we held fast, but the wayward “Sylph” struggled hard
for freedom, and we were thrice driven down with unpleasant violence
before I crippled the balloon so as to be able to get out.

We lost no time in returning from whence we came.

On the whole, people were well pleased, both those who were present at
the start and those who had only heard of the peculiar circumstances
under which it became expedient to make the ascent thus early in the
morning.

The newspaper accounts of this first attempt of mine in Belgium
eulogised it as “daring and extraordinary.” Public attention therefore
was not only called to it, but to another, which was spoken of as
certain to take place, provided the gas directors would bestir
themselves for the public good.

Thus politely challenged, how could they reasonably refrain from
obliging?

To do them justice, they came forward readily, and in less than a week
a six-inch main was introduced into the Prado Gardens.

On the 2nd of June a large attendance of the inhabitants of Brussels
testified the pleasure they derived from a close inspection of the
balloon. They were invited to see something like novelty in connection
with the ascent, as I had undertaken to show, on a miniature scale, how
practicable it was to discharge aërial shells from a balloon, supposing
they were needed in warfare, when it was not possible to bombard in
the usual way, owing to the intervention of hills, water, or other
impediments.

As there was hardly a breath of air stirring during inflation, the
“Sylph” stood proudly erect, and seemed to bask in the sunshine,
occasionally evincing a tendency to rise into the upper air, as if to
escape the heat below, by soaring into the refreshing coolness of the
skies.

A Belgian pyrotechnist having made the explosive shells, in strict
accordance with my instructions, and in exact imitation of a model to
scale, I was rather anxious to have them all brought out and adjusted
before the last moment of setting off.

Great interest was manifested and some apprehension felt about these
fireworks, which I had promised to ignite when 2,000 feet high.

The danger connected with their use rested in a great measure with the
manufacturer.

If my instructions were rigidly adhered to, they would go off as
certainly as a well-made military shell from a mortar. I had taken
the precaution of attaching them to a separate battery, which was
ready to lower when the balloon left the earth, and I could then pass
down a rope ladder, something after the plan of Lieut. Gale, and by
communicating with a fuse at a safe distance from the gas, the shells
would be ignited.

Being perfectly satisfied with the entire disposition of this part of
the contrivance, I invited my intended fellow travellers to enter the
car. These were Mr. N----, a railway engineer, and Mr. S----. At eight
o’clock p.m., barometer 30·2 and thermometer 66°, we set out for a
calm, delightful journey.

The “Sylph” rose almost perpendicularly, so that there was no necessity
for hurry in lowering the battery, or in going down to fire the shells.

In less than two minutes, a bluish outburst of smoke, followed by
a sharp sound, announced that the first aërial shell had burst in
mid-air; a second ring of smoke formed higher up near the balloon, and
then a third and fourth exploded at about the original range, the rest
following at stated intervals, and with remarkable precision.

Cheer succeeded cheer as each “bang” reached the earth.

“Look out for the next,” cried Mr. N---- as the twelfth shell darted
down towards the housetops, and then detonated with a loud ringing
report, which echoed in the still air like distant artillery. “That,
indeed, is a splendid sight.”

“And sound too,” added Mr. S----. “How many more are there to go off
now?”

“As many more,” I replied, “but there is no danger, they are all
trimmed to a nicety, and made to fall at least 300 feet before
exploding.”

“If these things were used on a large scale, how would you manage their
ignition?” enquired the engineer.

“That might be by concussion, supposing the shells were formed like a
pear, with two or three nipples at the heavier end, and by fuse as well
in case of failure when striking, but we will speak of these matters
by and bye; please to note down, barometer 25·4 and thermometer 47°
Fahrenheit; we have been so busy as not to have observed the pressure
and temperature, which were considerable.”

“It does not feel so much colder,” observed Mr. N----.

“No,” I answered, “for my part, it appears to me warmer, owing to my
going up and down the ladder and otherwise exerting myself; but pray
notice our course: you, as a resident, know all about that.”

“I am much mistaken,” said the engineer, “if we are not going direct
for Waterloo. We are too, by Jove!”

“Bravo,” I exclaimed; “how stands the barometer?”

“About 5·800 feet, we will lower gradually, as we clear the forest of
Soignes so as to have a good bird’s-eye view of the battle-fields.”

Mr. S----, who had been looking through a telescope, and who had only
recently accompanied us to Waterloo, now caught sight of the lion on
the mound.

“Sure enough,” he said, “we shall pass directly over.”

A balloon view of Waterloo with the surrounding country, and bold
acclivities, fails entirely to convey the martial associations, which
those noted Belgic plains would be expected to arouse. We felt hardly
reconciled to the fact, that, on that cluster of fields, which looked
so rural, and cultivated, the fate of Europe had been decided, in so
great and sanguinary a contest.

As our survey happened to be made in the same month as that on which
the memorable battle was fought; the general appearances of nature
could not have been very dissimilar to what they were on June 17th,
1815, just when the British infantry bivouacked on the rising ground
near the village, and the cavalry rested in those hollows in the rear.

It is true we gazed upon a landscape which was comparatively tame, when
unenlivened by the armies of Wellington, Blücher, and Napoleon.

An aërial glance at that great historical picture would indeed have
been a sight worth seeing. But the mere bird’s-eye view of the site was
somewhat disappointing.

Could we have seen the downtrodden corn and rye, the clouds of smoke,
the prancing horses, and helmeted riders, the splendid French columns
impetuously advancing against the solid squares of red. Could we have
heard the din and roar of musketry and cannon, and the wild hurrah of
the last grand charge, then indeed the scene would have appeared fresh
and imposing. Our bird’s-eye view of Waterloo, so far from being lively
and soul-stirring, was rather of a philosophical and contemplative
character.

One could not pass over the ruins of Hougomont, or the farm-house of
La Haye Saint, without thinking of the dust and ashes of countrymen
and fees which were there scattered in profusion; when we recollect
that on the small surface of two square miles, 50,000 men and horses
were ascertained to be lying, we can form some idea of the mouldering
remains which lie beneath the ripening crops, which presented
themselves to our view.

The sun had just set on the peaceful plains in rosy and majestic
grandeur. The glorious King of Day declined also on June 18th,
thirty-three years before we passed over in a balloon. But how
different the scene!

On that evening after the battle, when the cries of the wounded filled
the air, as the roar of artillery ceased, and, as night approached, the
earth was red dyed and sodden; but on this--inviting cheers of welcome
came to us on all sides, and at Waterloo we met with a most friendly
reception.

I made one more ascent in the year 1848, in Belgium; this time from the
Bourse, at Antwerp. The voyage which was made under great disadvantages
presented a rare and remarkable feature. The Englishman, with whom the
reader has been made acquainted, was again commissioned to negociate
with the gas directors of Antwerp, respecting an ample supply for
the inflation; but it again happened that the delivery was by no
means equal to our expectations. In fact, when the hour for departure
arrived, the “Sylph” was not half full.

What was to be done? The visitors would be disappointed, and my own
name connected with a failure.

“Well, that won’t do,” I remember saying, “if there is any means of
rising above the Exchange, and clearing Antwerp, I must resort to it.”

“Give me a supply of cordage, and let me tie a few lines across the
hoop, and see if there is gas enough to take me up without a car. Do
not say a word to anyone, lest our plans are thwarted.”

Having placed myself in the hoop, without any other protection
whatever, I found that the balloon would just raise me. The spectators
were not aware that I was about to leave them, minus a car to sit in,
so that, on mounting over their heads, great surprise was at first
manifested, but followed quickly by expressions of approbation, when
my risky position was known to be owing to a determination to fulfil
my contract. I attained a great elevation during this trip, but, being
without a barometer, I could only estimate it approximately at two and
a half miles, and this was done by observing that the balloon rose
until it became fully distended, and as it was not half inflated at
starting, I knew I was quite, if not over two and a half miles high,
because a volume of gas will double its bulk at an elevation of nearly
three miles and three-quarters.

The excessive cold I experienced was no doubt to be attributed to the
current of air passing through the ring, without being in any way
broken either by a wicker car or extra clothing.

Not having any ballast to put out or to work with, I was anxious
to allow the balloon to rise and fall by alternate expansion and
condensation, without letting out gas through the upper valve.

My descent was safely made near Turnhout.

A messenger from Brussels, direct from Callow’s Hotel, arrived on the
morning after the ascent, requesting an immediate interview on the
part of a gentleman from Prussia, who was anxious to take me over the
Rhine.

At the appointed hour, two cards were sent up, and a local solicitor
presented himself, and introduced me to Herr Abraham Küpper, the
proprietor of Johannisberg, a celebrated _locale_, as it was styled, at
Elberfeld.

Herr Küpper, a fine stout fellow with an immense beard, which spread
over a spotless white waistcoat, was one of those men who make a
pleasing first impression.

I conceived a decided prejudice in his favour before we had entered
much into matters of business, and as he was willing to agree to my own
terms for a certain number of ascents, the services of the solicitor
were soon brought into requisition, and an agreement entered into which
was mutually satisfactory. Herr Küpper then requested the favour of our
company during the afternoon, and as a carriage was at the door, he
proposed a drive in the Park.

Mr. S----, together with our friend, the roving Englishman, whose
personal appearance had improved, was pleased to find that our
prospects were brightening, and I ought to state that the latter was
not personally responsible, or at any rate to be blamed, for the
difficulties we had to contend with in Brussels; all that should
be placed to the account of his associates in the badly-managed
speculation. It was the Dutchman, the Belgian, and the Frenchman who
were not up to their work, he now pointed out, and happy was he to find
that this fine bold Prussian, with whom we were treating, was evidently
a man of business, and he further added, but not until we had partaken
of champagne as well as good claret, that he, Herr Küpper, clearly
knew what he was about; but whether the Englishman was alluding to the
treat instead of the treaty he did not say; but this much he let out,
that he was so much taken with our new acquaintance that he should be
happy, at our expense, to go with us to Elberfeld, but as Küpper could
neither speak French nor English, and as the rest of our party could
not say much in German, Mr. S---- pertinently asked whether he wished
to be engaged as interpreter or companion.

He was silenced at this enquiry, since none of us while drinking
success to the undertaking could understand or properly reply to the
caterer from Rhineland.

However, we started with him after a day or two spent in sight-seeing,
but we left the Brussels agent at his lodgings, committing ourselves
to the care of Herr Küpper, whose agreeable postures and friendly
attentions, combined with the most amusing efforts to do a little
broken English, made some amends for want of fluency on both sides,
but no sooner had we arrived at the Johannisberg Gardens at Elberfeld,
than the redoubtable proprietor called aloud, over the heads of a large
assemblage of visitors, for Mr. B----, when a gentleman, wearing a
white hat and green coat, came forward and hailed us as countrymen,
saying how glad he was to see us, and confirming his honest outburst
with such a hearty shaking of hands that a cry of “bravo!” burst from
many of those present.

Herr Küpper having thus introduced us, vociferated for champagne,
cigars, &c., though he need not have cried so loud, as there were two
or three _kelners_ close behind him; it had, however, to our way of
thinking a grand and welcome ring about it, and so thought Mr. B----,
who was none of your mock modest men, when good wine stared him in the
face.

“Go it Dick,” cried another Englishman, who was seated near our table,
and what with the accent of this familiar advice, backed with other
pleasantries, we soon felt at ease, if not at home.

Herr Küpper, some time after our refreshment with Mr. Dick B----,
invited us to see the ball-room and the grounds; we dined together
somewhat later, and after an excellent repast were present at the
concert.

Dick B---- was getting rather effusive in his explanations as to the
musicians, and becoming very red in the face, but he impressed us as
being a capital fellow under the circumstances in which we were placed,
and he was considered as such by many of his pupils who were present,
and who rejoiced to see him happy.

“You are not perhaps aware,” said Mr. B----, “that I am a teacher of
languages.”

Nor were we--as I, for one, had put him down as an equestrian or circus
master; however, we had fortunately not allowed the secret cogitations
to escape our lips, so no harm was done. Mr. B----, on our separating
that evening, promised to be “at our service” early next morning,
and sure enough Dick came to an early breakfast, and had not, as we
inferred, had very much sleep.

“The early bird gets the worm,” said Mr. B----, as he helped himself to
some wurst, or smoked sausage, by way of a patronising start.

“Make yourselves at home, gentlemen. Do you like raw ham and black
bread?” “_I do_,” he added; “have found out a thing or two since I left
the great city,” meaning London.

Mr. S---- who had delicate digestive organs, and who had not travelled
much, failed in doing that justice to his first German breakfast, which
Mr. B---- tackled with such gusto. He, however, partook of his coffee
with a quiet nod of approval, and was in the act of finishing his
first cup when the teacher of languages, looking S---- straight in the
face, said, “I suppose you had a smother of frogs at Callow’s Hotel in
Brussels;” but, perceiving that Mr. S---- turned pale, he exclaimed,
“My good fellow, what’s the matter?”

Poor S---- then ejected, almost in Mr. B----’s face, the black contents
of his white cup; he sprang up in a nervous, bewildered state, when I
had to do the amiable by way of apology.

Mr. Dick laughed, but stuck to his guns, and recommended eggs, when Mr.
Abraham Küpper’s voice was heard approaching, who entered smiling, and
was followed by a waiter with beefsteaks well broiled, but small; there
were three of them, by the way.

Mr. B---- rose to salute either the steaks or mine host, and rubbed his
hands with great glee.

“Eh, vat Mein Herren?” asked Herr Küpper, looking to B---- for a
response, as to Mr. S----’s sad appearance.

Dick, in German, assured the landlord that he had saved the life of Mr.
S---- who would positively starve unless he had something of that kind
to begin the day with.

“Donner wetter; what will he end with then?” asked Küpper astonished;
of course he knew S---- did not understand the remark, which was made
in German.

Dick B---- next declared in point blank Saxon, that for his part “he
had got his second wind,” and the steaks having restored Mr. S---- by
their timely arrival, we managed to pull through; the teacher having
taught us already more than one important lesson, and, what is more,
illustrated them with his own knife and fork, again fell to with an
appetite which was tremendous, considering that he was generous with
his coffee and had confessed to a couple of seidels of Beirisch before
he put in an appearance.

This, our first substantial breakfast went off very well considering
B----’s sallies and noble example.

“Now to business,” he said, after receiving our thanks for his service
at table.

Outside in the gardens, we could perceive one or two gas-men with their
chief engineer, and Abraham himself in his smoking cap, and a long
tight-fitting dressing gown, which reached to his slippers; in this
attire we noticed how sturdy he was, and withal how commanding.

“He turns sixteen and a half centners,” said B----, and their weights
are heavier than ours--“but come gentlemen, I perceive Küpper is
getting impatient.”

We thought that B---- toned down a good deal as we drew near to the
monarch of Johannisberg, who puffed his cigar, and then brushed off, or
rather hit aside a bit of steak adhering to B----’s coat.

What a change in manner and deportment, I thought. The fact was we
had kept them all waiting to get instructions as to the laying of the
gas pipes, while the teacher kept us pottering about inside, merely to
gratify his own inordinate propensity for creature comforts.

“Meester Coxvel,” cried Küpper--one might have heard his voice half
round Elberfeld.

B---- translated with a tremulous accent, as if he were funky; the
plain English of it was this--Would I point out, or stamp my foot, to
use Küpper’s definition, on the exact spot where the pipes were to
terminate in the inner circle, just where the balloon was to be filled.

Perceiving, with half an eye, what kind of man we had to do with, I ran
to the spot, stamped my foot firmly down, and cried out “here.”

“Sehr gut, now Herr Coxvel, (Mr. B---- translated) where will you place
the balloon?”

The reply, sharp and emphatic on my part, was again “_here_,” but I had
moved in the meantime a few yards farther on, and the smartness with
which Küpper’s questions were answered, elicited his approval, as he
raised his smoking cap, advanced towards me with a kindly greeting, and
drew forth his cigar case.

“_You_ have made a hit of it, if I have not,” cried B---- who was now
regaining self-possession.

All the preparations having been made to the satisfaction of Küpper,
who was a bit of a Tartar in his own domain, I was invited to accompany
him down town at midday, Mr. S---- being left to the care of B---- who
had begged a holiday from his pupils--they knowing, presumably, that he
would scarcely be equal to his duties, until he had indulged in his
first diversion of ballooning.

Abraham Küpper was great in riding, and he was also great in walking,
he stood over six feet without his glazed boots, and when, after
alighting from an open trap, he placed his arm in mine, and again
withdrew it to stroke down his fine flowing beard, he attracted the
attention of those who were passing by, and further rivetted it, by
pronouncing my name in no undertone, so that I heard several persons
observe, “Abraham und der Luftschiffer.”

He then led me with stately deportment into a confectioner’s, where in
a private room we met several professors, doctors, and merchants, most
of them I was relieved to find, speaking English; but Küpper on the way
had been polite enough to drill into me a rapid instalment of his own
language, although it was not high German, I was told--still to me it
had a most imposing utterance, accompanied as it was, with considerable
action.

One of the party to whom I was introduced, asked the pleasure of my
company next day at their scientific institution, as there were papers
to be read and discussion to follow on an interesting subject.

Küpper agreed that I was to be there without asking if I was that way
disposed.

He next hurried me on, goodness knows to how many different places, and
I could not but feel that his attentions were of a superior order to
what I had met with in Brussels.

At the Institution on the following day, I was at first disappointed,
as the proceedings appeared to me of an informal, and easy going kind.

The room where we met was redolent with the perfumes of tobacco, and
coffee was being served, but I soon found out that the proceedings
were of a philosophical character, being assisted with explanations in
English from Herr Buchmann, who spoke our language well.

After the lecture I tried to get away, feeling much ashamed of my
inability to converse in German, but I was retained by Herr Buchmann,
who drew me out on my own speciality, and I was glad to find by
questions put from different parts of the room that most of those
present could express themselves intelligibly in my native tongue.

“Had I any views of my own in writing?” Yes, I had by me a pamphlet,
which was read, and which referred to military ballooning. My opinions
so far commended themselves to those present that I was invited to
become an honorary member, and of course signed my name.

By the time announcements had gone forth as to the first ascent, I had
made so many acquaintances, that I positively required a new hat after
so often raising my old one, according to the approved local fashion
which they managed with so much ease and frequency, that I wondered how
they could do so with such little wear and tear to the rim.

Mr. B---- informed me that he never could attain to that mode of
salutation, he prided himself on being a Briton to the back bone, and
satisfied himself, if not the ladies by a semicircular move of the
right hand from his chest outwards. B---- was a favourite, I found,
notwithstanding his brusque address. I began to feel afraid that he
would neglect his own interests by devotion to our cause.

One day I overheard a protest from one of his best patrons, which
terminated with “that confounded balloon,” but Dick always turned
up when he was wanted, and now and again when he had better have
been engaged elsewhere; he was a typical cockney of the unaffected,
commercial class, never having taught his own language until he took up
his abode in Elberfeld.

Very early on the morning of the ascent, I mean by 5 a.m., the voice of
Herr Küpper might be heard over the housetops, and along the valley of
the River Wupper. Mr. B---- was in attendance, and trying to soothe the
lessee’s occasional irritability, but he had been upset by one Peter, a
_Kellerman_ who was thought to have imbibed his master’s beer, brewed
on the premises. Out of twenty workmen who had been told off for our
assistance, this Peter had been placed by me to hold the neck part of
the balloon, where the gas passes in through a hose.

After doing his best for some time, poor Peter’s eyes began to roll
rather wildly, when Küpper, with more haste than discretion, sent
him to the right about, which caused Peter to stumble against the
balloon; Küpper, terribly indignant at this, gave him such a lift under
the “stern sheets,” as the sailors say, that Peter impelled by the
motive power of the governor’s left leg, flew, as it were, out of the
enclosure; the incident caused some merriment, and at the same time
it induced me to examine the connecting links of the hose pipe. They
were all right, but below the hoop of the safety valve, Peter, in his
eagerness to hold fast, had sent his nails through the silk, and had
made a hole, so that the poor fellow was taking in the fumes of gas,
which accounted for his stupefaction.

This explained--it is due to Küpper to say that Peter was recalled,
cheered up, and told to have his coffee and something with it, on a
table in the garden.

I soon repaired the fracture, when Peter volunteered to try again. I
was not displeased with the proposal, and took pains to explain the
best method of manipulating such delicate material.

Peter’s efforts were now a masterpiece of caution blended with
dexterity, and his reappearance produced a feeling of admiration and
sympathy among all who were assisting at the inflation.

The flow of gas was much stronger than I had expected, owing to our
elevated position. An indication of perfect satisfaction on my part,
caused Herr Küpper to light his morning cigar, an act which drew forth
a flash of disapproval in my eyes and face, so that the big man almost
quailed when I shouted that match striking so near the balloon was
highly dangerous. Küpper immediately sent his sweet smelling cigar
flying outside the circle; when I explained that it was the flame, not
the tobacco that I considered risky.

Mr. B----, Mr. S----, and the engineer were now chuckling over the
alternate indications of official temper, which two of us as the chief
actors had displayed in our respective capacities.

“A certain amount of this sort of thing _goes down_ like goose
stuffing,” said Mr. B----.

“And enforces authority and caution,” cried Mr. S----.

“Precisely,” admitted the teacher, “but I do hope that Küpper will
restrain himself, his temper at times is alarming; but see how soft and
subdued he looks now that Madame Küpper is approaching; no wonder, she
has announced that breakfast is ready.”

“Meester Coxvel, Meinherren, beefsteak and coffee all ready.”

“No objection,” was the answer, as we were well ahead with the filling,
“suppose we stop for an hour, Mr. S---- will keep watch until I return,
and the men can have their coffee brought out.”

“And so I will,” said Mr. S----, “but I say B----, not too much steak,
and no frogs, mind that.”

Mr. B---- simply waved his hand in reply, as the great man Küpper
inspired him with a certain amount of awe, which there was no mistaking.

My first ascent from Elberfeld was on July 16th, 1848. It was almost
a cloudless day, but not oppressively hot, as a fresh wind blew which
made it desirable to call in thirty men to hold the netting.

I had appointed Mr. B---- to be my first lieutenant, and in order
to assist me, he had obtained the permission of his pupils, most of
whom were present, as much, probably, to see their preceptor in a new
capacity, as to patronize me and the balloon.

The recreation grounds where the visitors had assembled, were of an
oblong form, and perfectly dry, with gravel beneath. A vast number of
tables were arranged in rows, so that families and parties of friends
sat each at their own quarters.

The ladies were nearly all knitting or otherwise at work, and during
the instrumental performances, gentlemen smoked their cigars, drank
coffee, and conversed in a quiet way, which struck one as making a
pleasing contrast with some of our out-door gatherings in England.

Mr. Abraham Küpper occupied a central position at a table fronting the
balloon, and was surrounded by a choice staff of patrons, who, as the
afternoon advanced, preferred sparkling wine to heavier beverage served
in seidel glasses.

Mr. B----, who had most heroically stood his ground against the united
force of a strong current of wind, which had ever and anon distorted
the symmetrical form of the “Sylph,” and blown some of the men over,
now sent to me to allow him to retire for one minute, not that he
wished to relinquish his post of directing the men, but that he
required to speak, for one moment, to Herr Küpper.

On seeing Mr. B---- approach, the noble proprietor who wore a plum
coloured dress-coat, and a variegated smoking cap, filled a bumper
of hock, so that by the time Mr. B---- had wiped his moist brow, and
taken a seat by invitation, he found himself confronted with friends,
together with an abundance of pungent snuff and cooling wine.

“I wonder which he will take first,” asked Mr. S----, watching Mr.
B----’s movements askance.

“It’s a hundred to one he drinks the wine,” said I, but before I had
finished speaking, his glass was empty, and quickly refilled by Herr
Küpper, who, with a patronizing pat of the back, called him “gut boy,”
alluding not, of course, to his smartness with the wine glass, but to
his arduous duties around the balloon, by which he drew forth high
encomiums from the spectators, as well as from Herr Küpper and myself.

Although Mr. B---- exceeded the time specified by himself for his
absence, still I declined to trouble him to return, as I felt sure his
physical exertions were already more than he was accustomed to, and I
had an object in reserving his powers for the final effort, knowing
that when the balloon was let up to its full height, it would roll
about with great force, and require all the available strength to hold
it in check.

The miniature bombardment, illustrative of the applicability of aërial
shells to military purposes, was to take place on a larger scale than
at Brussels.

I rather hoped to have Mr. B----’s company in my travels to Cloudland,
but resolved not to propose it until the last moment.

When the car was being attached, Herr Küpper, and Mr. B---- entered
the inner enclosure, and every assistance was tendered, but the wind
unfortunately seemed late in lulling, and we were frequently thrown
into ludicrous positions, by which the company was kept excited, and
the juveniles furnished with matter for laughter.

Just before the shells and battery were fixed, Mr. B---- became the
“observed of all observers,” and created no little merriment and
clapping of hands.

I had called him to the car to suggest his ascending, and at that
moment a cruel gust blew the balloon almost down to the ground, and
upset Mr. B---- as he advanced, but recovering himself with admirable
agility, he seized the netting by way of support, when the balloon
again caught the breeze, and rolled round on the other tack, carrying
the astonished teacher with it, so that, minus his hat, he was
suspended some altitude from the ground, but held on with such resolute
tenacity, that a cry was soon raised of “Bravo B----, very brave,”
and as the “Sylph” backed round on the other side, Mr. B---- was
rescued, and again led by Herr Küpper to the refreshment table, where
he composed himself and received the congratulations of many of his
friends.

“It will never do to take him up after that shaking,” urged Mr. S----.

“Right, I will start alone, next time there will be plenty of
candidates; please to attach the shells, as I shall slip cable in five
minutes.”

The band now formed round the car; Messrs. Küpper, and B---- held
the last connecting link, and at six o’clock I released the “Sylph,”
immediately lowered the battery, and on passing down the Jacob’s
ladder, received a perfect ovation.

The shells fell quite regularly, and made an unusually loud report,
reverberating among the adjacent hills on either side of the river
Wupper.

The sky being clear from cloud, the smoke which followed each explosion
produced a splendid effect, and imparted a totally new aspect to the
appearance of a balloon in mid-air.

The “Sylph” not being fully inflated, and the car without passengers,
I had some difficulty in retracing my steps after discharging the
fireworks, whether the lookers on observed this, I could not say, but
on resting half way up the rope ladder, I heard sounds more akin to
a thrill of horror than a cheer; no doubt the position of dangling
between the car and the battery, looked perilous, but it was not more
so than some of the acts of seamen, although excessive height added of
course to the risk.

The subsequent journey was very enjoyable, being my first aërial voyage
in Prussia.

I had been cautioned, before ascending, against some large forests in
the direction I should travel, and noticed them around me, without any
considerable opening to come down in.

Being quite alone I was naturally disinclined to extend my journey
beyond a reasonable distance, so I brought the “Sylph,” after attaining
an elevation of 1,500 yards, to within a few hundred feet of the tree
tops, and perceiving an open space hard by with a plantation of young
pines, I dropped the grapnel just in an eligible clump of trees, and
was glad to find that the wind had lulled, and that I was anchored firm
and fast.

The car lodged in the boughs and only the balloon remained in sight;
but as to whether there were people to be found in so outlandish a spot
I began to be doubtful, as I had shouted for some time, and neither
heard a human voice nor footsteps.

Repeated shouts had, however, some effect, as I perceived a country
girl without shoes or stockings, and one or two men creeping along in
attitudes of amazement towards the plantation in which the “Sylph” was
moored; a few wood-cutters and children soon added to the number, and
when they got pretty close I shouted again, but it was a wild English
ye-upp, more like an omnibus driver’s warning than a German call for
help.

The result was the people withdrew affrighted; if they could have seen
me it might have altered the case, but I was ensconced in the trees,
and my voice was neither familiar nor understandable.

Believing that curiosity would prevail, I contented myself by keeping
quiet in the car for some little time, and before many minutes had
elapsed I perceived the bare-legged girl moving stealthily towards me,
supported by followers in the background; I purposely kept low and let
out gas, by which means the basket slipped towards the ground as the
girl pressed forward.

Just as she got within range I sprang up in the basket and seized the
comely creature’s rounded arms, and drew her very near to me; she was
then clearly less frightened, as she uttered a few guttural sounds
accompanied with looks of kindness.

The men then ran up and helped to get the balloon clear of the trees,
so that I received plenty of attention; and later, when I went to the
damsel’s house, her mother made coffee for me, after which I was driven
some miles to the railway station and returned to Elberfeld.

My second ascent from Johannisberg took place on July 24th. A third
soon followed, but the fourth was chiefly remarkable from the fact that
Herr Küpper ascended with me himself, although he had always said that
no real or imaginable inducement would get him up in a balloon.

If Küpper’s courage was not in proportion to the bulk of his body he
pulled himself very well together at the start. It was only when I
left him alone to go down the ladder that large drops of perspiration
started from his brow.

I promised to be back soon.

“Yah, aber mein Gott--if you go down headlong,” he added, but I heard
this not, and might not have understood the German rendering if I had.

When the bombardment of Elberfeld commenced certain utterances did
reach my ear in the second car below, but whether I was being cheered
or denounced, whether Küpper was sick or joyful, I could not divine;
this I know, that when I returned or (to use parliamentary language)
when I was promoted from the lower house to the upper, I certainly did
notice that my sole companion was in a pitiable plight so far as facial
moisture was concerned.

A capacious handkerchief appeared drenched, and still the drops were
oozing fast from the expanded pores of his skin. He must have lost a
couple of pounds’ weight while I was down below. A rapid recovery,
however, took place, especially after both of us had benefited by
restoratives; then was Abraham more composed, and anxious not to go
too far, as he looked forward, I could gather by his pointing to, and
his remarks about Johannisberg, that he wished to get back as soon as
convenient.

I managed accordingly, and just as the ball-room lights appeared
resplendent, and the band was tuning up for a dance, we entered amidst
cries of “Hoch Küpper;” “Leben sie lang Herr Coxvel,” &c.; and great
indeed were the rejoicings which were, it is perhaps needless to
observe, participated in by Mr. B---- and Mr. S----, _cum multis aliis_.

During the autumn of this year (1848) I made a dozen voyages from this
place, and the confidence displayed by the proprietor was felt also by
Madame Küpper, her daughter and sons, as also by Mr. B---- and a very
long list of ladies and gentlemen, who by watching the safe return, and
good reports of the pioneers who first ventured, felt satisfied of the
pleasure to be derived, and were prepared to venture themselves.

Before making the two concluding trips of the season, a speculation was
entered into by Herr Küpper, Mr. S----, and myself, at Cologne, with
a view of trying an ascent during the grand visit of the late King of
Prussia, on the occasion of the 600th anniversary of the building of
the cathedral.

I had no faith myself in the pecuniary success of this undertaking, but
the joint speculators were very sanguine of a golden harvest.

Although an immense number of strangers came into Cologne, and the
hotels were filled to overflowing, the processions and religious
ceremonies so engrossed public attention that the balloon grounds,
after expensive preparations, were but poorly patronized.

A large sum of money was lost by these ill-conceived projects, which
turned out a serious matter to us.

The last display but one was in the month of October at Johannisberg,
and it was a night ascent with fireworks attached to the balloon--but
fireworks altogether of a different kind to the shells which I
had detached previously. In its way this might be called a grand
pyrotechnic display _á la_ Vauxhall; but the specific gravity of the
gas was not as on former days, and a humid atmosphere at night-fall
increased the weight of the “Sylph” to such an extent that it would not
raise the fireworks. I found that the whole weight would not ascend.

A buzz of disappointment then began to arise, but it was not of long
duration, as I begged the firework maker to cut away about one-third of
the cases, and calling for a rope some 300 feet long, which had been
employed before for partial ascents, I got into the ring without any
car, and gave directions to fire the fuse and let up to the full extent
of the cable.

This was equally effective, and the people were much more pleased than
if I had made a bungling effort by being overweighted.

I had afterwards the honour of being carried round the grounds and the
ball-room on the shoulders of some of the most respected citizens.

There was yet one more aërostatic exhibition which I was called upon to
engage in, and that was in connection with the annual _Shutzen Fest_ at
Barmen, an adjoining neighbourhood, about three English miles from Herr
Küpper’s noted locale.

These interesting gatherings are managed in a style of magnificence
peculiar to Germany.

So far as the balloon was concerned it was not required for an ordinary
ascent, but rather as an aërial chariot to do honour to the “King of
the Feast,” and to afford a panoramic view to as many as obtained
tickets for the privilege of being let up a tolerable altitude over the
heads of the assembled thousands.

First came the king with cocked hat, feathers, and gay costume; and
then a large silver goblet and a bottle of champagne were handed in;
when we--that is the king and the aëronaut only--were let up to drink
_Hoch_, to the success of the society.

His majesty accorded me a most fraternal greeting, in the midst of
which the people cheered vociferously.

As if to prolong the compliment, the king continued some time with his
arms round my shoulders, and this appeared to be the signal for renewed
cheering, but Dick B---- who had charge of the ropes, and who knew how
such German salutations bothered and perplexed an Englishman, gave a
sudden jerk to the ropes, by which his majesty was reminded that he did
not occupy an earthly throne; and thus freed from such distinguished
favours, I gave the signal to haul down, when other members of the club
had, each according to his merit, a ride in the balloon car.

The festivities and the rope ascents were kept up all that day and
night. So far as the balloon was concerned, its duties were at an end
by daybreak, but as the “Sylph” contained sufficient gas to raise
me--although it had not been replenished for forty-eight hours--I made
up my mind, instead of letting it out, to ascend to a great height, and
witness the sunrise.

Although everybody appeared to be fagged out, and I was more fitted
myself for rest than travelling, still the opportunity of so glorious a
spectacle on a calm autumnal morning was not to be lost.

I therefore hurried on my departure; and slipped away with an easy
ascending power, travelling very low for a few miles of country, when
the gas began to expand more rapidly, and the balloon mounted up with
an accelerated speed, as if it were a thing of life, apprehensive of
being late to usher in the cheering king of day.

The barometer at starting was 29·70, and Reaumur’s thermometer was
9°. Just before six o’clock the former had fallen in the course of
forty minutes to 17·50, and the latter to -3° or seven degrees of
frost according to Fahrenheit. The effects of this amount of cold were
doubtless greater, owing to fatigue, damp boots, and a want of exercise
before starting.

I have been up more than twice the elevation since, without feeling
the cold so severely, although Fahrenheit’s thermometer has registered
several degrees below zero.

The sun’s rays in this morning ascent were clear, and though they pass
through space without imparting much heat--unless they are reflected
and radiated--yet it must be remembered that the balloon itself is a
diminutive planet as it were, and intercepts the sun’s influence, if
the atmosphere is free from clouds.

Before the sky had given the customary indication of sunrise to the
city below, it was grand and impressive to contrast the high and rosy
dawn, of which I had a view, with the dark gloom still pervading the
earth towards the east; and even when in blood-red majesty the great
luminary had risen above the ridge of the distant horizon, the land
beneath was as yet comparatively dark, showing thereby the excessive
elevation of the balloon.

I determined very soon after witnessing sunrise to seek a warmer
atmosphere, and descended about 6000 feet rather quickly; here I lost
the sun, but immediately he rose again for the second time, when a
large looking tower, a few miles ahead, came into view; and, as I
had not observed this place previously, I determined to get as near
as possible, and again used the valve pretty freely to accomplish my
object. When within 1200 feet of the ground, I was astonished to find
that my downward course had been almost as rapid as the rising of the
sun. He was again very near the visible horizon. Grand and singular
were the views which I had on that memorable morning.

In this part of my experiences, I purposely abstain from giving details
of the variations of height and temperature, because further on in the
account of my life it will be quite in place to do so.

Even for scientific men, the constant repetition of monotonous tables
is calculated to mar the freshness of continuous narrative. Besides, in
public ascents for festive purposes, it has never been the custom of
aëronauts to dot down more than occasionally the different states of
the atmosphere. Indeed, if they attend mechanically to the requirements
of the balloon, they have not much time for this work, unless they have
assistance.

Without knowing what town it was in advance, I lowered on the leeward
side, and noticed a great many priests and soldiers. As the grapnel
trailed over a field, I heard a scream, like the voice of a child. On
turning to see if the iron had caught anything, I saw a hare, hooked on
to the prongs, but it was knocked off again before the progress of the
balloon was arrested.

The town proved to be Munster and after _déjeuner_, and a description
of the voyage to several of the good people of the place, I felt the
over-powering effects of change of air, with no previous rest for two
nights.

Before dropping off to sleep, I asked the hours of the post leaving.
“If,” thought I, “the first is lost through somnolency, I shall
certainly be ready for the last;” but it so happened that the two
slipped past, and I did not awake until aroused for _abend brod_.

Early next day I wrote to Mr. S----, telling him of my whereabouts,
and inviting him to join me for a few days at Munster. I received no
reply, for the best of all reasons, he had not received the news, but
intelligence of a rather gloomy character had reached Elberfeld, as it
appeared by the _Zeitung_ of that town that I had been killed on my
aërial journey, having fallen out of the car near Dortmund, half way
between Barmen and Munster. On receipt of this intelligence, Mr. S----
and another gentleman named Drebes were despatched immediately to the
spot where the disaster was said to have happened, but no authentic
information could be obtained, beyond the fact that the “Sylph” had
passed overhead, at a great elevation, between seven and eight o’clock
A.M., on the morning referred to.

The party in search then decided to go on to Munster, but we
fortunately met at Hamm railway junction, I having lost no time,
after being killed by the newspapers, in getting back to establish my
vitality.

It may well be supposed, that the interview on my arrival, was of an
exciting order. It was not the first time that I had received the
congratulations of people who had believed me dead, but this reception
I met with was very sincere, and I am not sure that it didn’t put some
new life into one who had been so sensationally deprived of existence
by mere rumour.

Ballooning being over for the season, Mr. S---- returned to England,
and as I was disposed to remain in Germany for the winter, it was not
long before a proposal was made, that I should purchase the balloon and
ascend entirely on my own account.

Having agreed to do so, I stayed at Elberfeld for the winter.

Before I left, the revolutionary movement had broken out afresh in the
Rhine Province, and I had an opportunity of seeing a few shots fired,
and a vast deal of excitement in Elberfeld.

After a great deal of agitation and discontent, a number of Prussian
soldiers were on their march to preserve order. I was taking a stroll
one day with Mr. B----, when it was reported that the military were
approaching. Barricades had been formed already with the pavement
stones from the streets.

There was a general uproar. We were spectators of the riot, and saw the
mob try to fire the Mayor’s house, and eventually do a vast deal of
injury.

On the arrival of a battery of nine-pounders, and a few companies of
infantry, the barricades were manned, and flags of defiance hung out.
The soldiers drew up in the principal square, and towards evening they
moved forth, when we were not far from the barricades.

The street in which the first obstacle was raised, had riflemen at the
windows; a captain was shot, and several soldiers killed or wounded
before the discharge of cannon. The defenders of this barricade were
either frightened or blown away much quicker than we expected, but as
darkness crept on, the military withdrew, expecting a reinforcement in
the morning from Düsseldorf.

During the night, Mr. B---- and I visited the barricades, it was
not an easy matter to approach or enter them, but everybody knew
the _luftschiffer_ or aëronaut, and the English teacher, and no one
supposed that we were spies or combatants.

Among the gaily decorated occupiers of the barricades, were several
of the men who had assisted as labourers at the balloon ascents; some
of these men claimed an intimate acquaintanceship, and although they
merely drank small beer when engaged in our service, yet now that the
tables were turned, they invited us to drink something stronger, and it
was not advisable to offer them a slight by an arrogant refusal.

The hours we spent among the barricades, and in the hotels which were
behind them, proved entertaining and instructive.

At Easter in the year 1849, I made the first spring trip at Barmen, but
before midsummer I started for Berlin, where notices were already out,
to the effect that I would ascend shortly from the far-famed Kroll’s
Gardens.

There were two points about my first exhibition in the Prussian
capital, which caused it to be well remembered. The first was a
public demonstration of the possibility of discharging petards with
safety. The second was a riot in the _Thier Garten_, outside the
Brandenburg Gate, where considerable damage was done to the shrubs,
and a quarrel occurred with the constables, some of whom were severely
beaten. A detachment of soldiers was called in to restore order, but
General Wrangel was prevented from inspecting my apparatus, and that
illustrious soldier was stoned on his way to the gardens, so that the
police authorities prohibited any more ascents, and I was ordered to
remove the cause of disorder, which was the balloon. But instead of
obeying the instructions of the two fierce looking messengers from the
President of Police, I caused them to be referred to Miss Kroll, the
proprietress. I then ascended, as at Brussels, before the stated hour,
offering as a reason, the following morning, that it was easier and
more congenial with my feelings, to let out the gas at some distant
place, than to be compelled to do so on my first essay in Berlin.

On due application on the part of myself and Miss Kroll, the
prohibition against ascending again was withdrawn. I not only did so
on June 11th, but on the 19th instant as well. This time the “Sylph”
passed over Berlin, and was becalmed for more than an hour, affording
an excellent opportunity for the Berliners to witness the bombardment.

There was so little air stirring this evening, that the descent was
made on the military exercising grounds, outside the capital. It struck
me on landing, that instead of letting the gas off, I would move the
balloon outside the walls of Berlin, round to Kroll’s Gardens again,
for a second ascent.

This was a difficult and tedious achievement, but the weather was
favourable for its accomplishment, and it was my ambition to surprise
and please the Garden visitors by exploits which had never been carried
out before.

Miss Kroll’s brother accompanied me in the car, and we directed a
number of soldiers and civilians to march on in the way considered best.

The wonder was that the police did not stop the procession. On arriving
at a part of the outskirts, where some trees and water presented a
barrier to our transit, an idea struck me that an immense amount of
time and labour might be saved, if I dared to strike straight through
Berlin, but Mr. Kroll was of opinion that the soldiers would not permit
us to pass the gates, unless we had authority to do so.

“Let us try,” I urged, “we can beat an honourable and masterly retreat
when we are rejected.”

The bold way in which we moved towards the nearest gate, with the
“Sylph” towering sixty feet from the ground, completely astonished the
sentinel, and the guard as well, which turned out and confronted the
mob now becoming formidable.

Mr. Kroll was asked, when he explained my object, if I had my
permission, to which I replied myself with, “here it is,” bringing
forth the police permission to ascend that day.

I was not bound, as an Englishman and a stranger, to explain that the
_erlaubnitz_ said nothing about _returning_, and as the good-natured
soldiers principally looked to dates, stamps, &c., the gates were
opened to let us through, but very few of our outside followers were
allowed to pass, excepting the blue-coats off duty, who really were a
protection.

The “Sylph” thus passed straight through the city, and was finally
restored to the Gardens without accident before daybreak. The small
gas-works connected with Kroll’s establishment was again set to work
to generate coal gas, and the next day after being duly replenished, I
ascended again.

But there was one great drawback to Kroll’s Gardens, and that was
the long and weary time occupied in inflating. Their little holder
contained only 7000 feet, and what was this towards 32,000 feet, the
contents of the “Sylph.”

I found too, that the confidence inspired by my already numerous
ascents secured me, if I could have taken them, fellow travellers who
were ready and eager to pay a goodly premium for ascending under my
guidance.

It became desirable therefore to tax the full capabilities of the
balloon for passenger accommodation, and as a slow-filling, with heavy
gas, made a difference in the lifting power, sometimes of two persons,
it will be seen that my interests were, in more ways than one, at
stake, and that a more fitting locality for the ascents became in every
way desirable.

The _Schutzenhaus_, situated at the opposite side of Berlin, was
suggested as most suitable for the filling, and thither I accordingly
went after an amount of delay and circumlocution, which was damaging to
my prospects during the finest period of the year.

Here I made a series of trips, always having a full cargo of
passengers. During their progress I was induced by a speculative German
to try a couple of ascents at Stettin, a seaport and consequently
an uninviting place. The chances of success, however, were good, as
there was a well built gas-works there, and no ascent had taken place
previously.

All my requirements were met in first-class style, and the use of
the gas-works yard, a new and commodious place, was granted for the
accommodation of the public.

The first journey, which took place on September 2nd, 1849, was
somewhat inland, but before the commencement of the second on the 6th,
there were grave apprehensions that I should be driven out into the
East Sea, and as the wind was boisterous, good fortune appeared to
draw me back after going out, but I was favoured again before sunset,
as I crossed the Dammsischezee in safety with my two companions and
landed on the opposite side without inconvenience. My visit to Stettin
was thoroughly remunerative and satisfactory. Having another ascent on
September 9th, at Berlin, I returned and made it, my route after that
being a long one, as it extended to Silesia.

Ballooning was little known in Breslau, and if I rushed on to that
town there was no calculating what amount of cash I might pocket.
Making fair allowance for sanguine expectations, and believing that
something might be done, I joined a Prussian merchant who had been a
good deal in England, and we started with a business-like arrangement
which I had no cause to be dissatisfied with, when it came to various
settlements in thalers and bank-notes.

Everything of a public character in Germany required a large amount of
patience, time, and good temper, there are so many preliminaries and
permissions to be thought of and obtained, that one cannot positively
say that he will ascend at such and such a place until the invariable
routine has been gone through, and much tact employed in making
application without creating enemies. In my affairs there were nearly
always difficulties to be surmounted. It was not easy to find a well
sheltered ground where ladies as well as gentlemen could assemble,
nor was it usual to meet with capacious gas pipes in a spot otherwise
adapted for gathering.

We experienced the like drawback in Breslau, and, after repeated
efforts, were compelled to fall back on the gas-works wherein to admit
the inhabitants.

I had obtained sanction for three ascents, and the first took place
on September 20th. The local newspapers emphatically stated on the
following day that all Breslau turned out to see the English aëronaut
mount to the skies.

For the three different classes we had places varying in comfort and
price, but the first place with covered seats, was not considered by
some hundreds of the spectators, half so favourable for seeing as a
pile of coke, whereon both sexes seated themselves, notwithstanding
certain damage to the gay dresses of the ladies. My companions were
Herr Firle, the director of the gas-works, and Herr Gendry, a merchant.

At starting, Reaumur’s thermometer stood at 10°, barometer at 29·62,
time 5h. 15m. The clouds stratus were 900 feet thick, when at 5h. 32m.,
height 3911 feet above the sea level, we broke into a clear space, but
there was a second tier of rain cloud above, where the barometer read
23·4, the cold here was as low as 3¾ of Reaumur. We came down near
_Schönbankwitz_, about eighteen miles from Breslau.

The second exhibition took place on September 22nd. The voyagers were
Dr. Mettner, Herr Piller, and Herr Schulz. The meteorological features
were not so widely different from the first, as to require special
notice.

At the village of _Klein-Mochbern_ I let fall a parachute with two
rabbits in the car, and we descended near _Minkau_.

The success of a third ascent would have been certain, both as regards
public patronage and pecuniary results, but it was prevented from
taking place by the owner of a small potato field adjacent to the
gas-works. The people standing outside had done some damage, and the
man renting it lodged a complaint with the authorities, but instead of
simply asking me, as an Englishman would have done, to purchase the
stock or make some adequate compensation, this selfish and mercenary
fellow defeated himself; having chosen his remedy he was bound to
pursue it. He was not aware that he would be outgeneralled himself. In
full expectation of another ascent, he gave out that damages would be
increased, and that he would then fall upon the Englishman for immense
compensation, which he was sure to obtain.

I had the crop duly surveyed, and no real injury had as yet been
sustained so that I decided without letting anybody know, besides a
certain functionary whose approval was necessary, to get my passport
returned in order to leave Breslau that very night. As the season
was advancing and I wished to take my balloon due north, it was of
importance that I should not be delayed by any vexatious proceedings
such as that mentioned.

On the day following my departure, the potato dealer was apprised of
my having left with balloon, bag and baggage, and that a third ascent
would not take place, he then became as may be surmised, terribly
irate, and immediately set on foot an enquiry whether the tradesmen
employed by me, had been swindled or paid.

There is very little trouble in arriving at conclusions of this sort on
the Continent, and when it was found that a good and highly flattering
report from the police accompanied my departure, the over-reaching
dealer saw that he had been completely done by a stranger, and that the
act was countenanced and facilitated by his own neighbours.

The next town I was anxious to visit during the autumn of 1849, was
Hamburg. There were reasons why I should entertain great expectations
of doing well there.

Firstly, there was abundance of gas to be had, and secondly, there had
been no ascent there for many years.

Under these auspices, I started in company with the Prussian with whom
I had associated myself in Berlin, and we took up our quarters near
the Alster, quite sanguine as to being able to find a public garden or
other locality from which to ascend.

My first application was to President Gossler, the head official and
senator, to whom I presented my credentials, I was graciously promised
every assistance, and was requested to apply again when a convenient
place was found.

We rose early next morning with the express object of exploring
Hamburg. Two or three agents, with a view of assisting in the
enterprise, accompanied us, and it was not long before a well enclosed
plot of ground presented itself; but obstacles arose as fast as
localities sprang into view, the chief of which was a consideration
(pecuniary of course), which was, no doubt, the custom of the country,
but not at all palatable to my taste in the loose way in which it was
required to be made; for instance--it was whispered, that the golden
key was the thing here to unlock all difficulties,--good, so it is in
most places: “But in what form do you propose to apply it?” I enquired
of our agent.

“A few pounds to pave the way as a presentation would be advisable.”

“Indeed,” said I to our Hebrew-looking adviser, “I do not understand
that vague sort of trafficking; if the holder of a piece of property
will set a price on the letting of it, I will say yes or no!”

“They will let you have it for nothing, but you must be polite and
expend a few pounds first with those you wish to help you.”

“That is not my style of doing business, and I do not approve of it.”

“Then you will not be fortunate here.”

“That,” I replied, “we can only know by and bye.”

After days of laborious enquiry, we ascertained that there was a great
deal of truth in what we had heard.

In communicating with the directors of the gas-works, we were advised
to do the best we could in view of existing practices, but somehow we
became irritated at them, and a degree of obstinacy followed which was
hardly, perhaps, in accordance with worldly wisdom.

“At any rate,” as I observed to my joint speculator, “we will strike
out alone, and try to do without these Jewish negociators.”

When we were seen to search about without companions or agents, great
was the laugh at such British stupidity and meanness, but when we
selected a piece of land, and the builders with their carts and boards
were seen to assemble, and it became known that a vast _cirque_ was to
be erected in the most charming locality, then it was admitted that we
were decidedly knowing, and had done the smartest thing attempted in
the free town for some considerable time.

Having then, without the co-operation or approval of the German Jews,
chosen an eligible plot upon which we were permitted to erect a wooden
enclosure of about 150 feet in diameter; notices were posted that an
ascent would take place on the following Wednesday.

The local press cheered the venture with the most encouraging
paragraphs, and took a retrospective glance at my previous ascents in
Germany. This act of kindness was sufficient to ensure a successful
campaign, the more so as my first ascent in October went off with great
_éclat_, and I took with me two passengers, Mr. Ballheimer, and Herr
Rieck.

These gentlemen, who journeyed with me into Holstein, came back with
such a stirring account of cloudland, that I was safe as to passengers
for the next three voyages. I made altogether four before the close of
the season, the last on November 9th, was a remarkable trip, it will be
interesting therefore to append the more striking particulars.

The final ascent was preceded by a number of captive trips to the
extent of a rope two hundred feet long.

Many of the first-class people of Hamburg including the president and
some of the senators, went up thus far, but the most popular candidate
was a heroine weighing at least nineteen stone, and attired in a humble
cotton dress, with a huge time-worn umbrella tucked under her left arm.

I had just decided upon concluding these captive ascent when the goodly
dame burst out into an audible lamentation that she had travelled, I
don’t know how many miles, on purpose to see the English balloon, and
now her chance of going up in it was lost.

The spectators laughed heartily, and inferred by her corpulent
appearance that her chances for a ride were few indeed. A policeman
endeavoured to check her zeal, but she saluted me with her umbrella,
and in return for this rough but well-meant compliment I left the
enclosure and offered the good soul my arm, escorting her to the car
amidst a roar of merriment which lasted for some minutes. Orders were
given to let out to the full extent of the rope, and up we went amidst
deafening cheers and lively music when the lady returned thanks with
her umbrella and repeated the noddings from a shovel-shaped bonnet
which bespoke her humble--though at the moment elevated--position.

This little episode being completed, I summoned the aspirants for
aëronautic honours. They were Mr. H. Zeise of Altona, Dr. Braun, and
Herr Kruss.

The barometer on the earth was 29.1½, and the temperature 10° Reaumur.
We were eighty-eight Hamburg feet above the sea level where we started,
and the wind was south.

The “Sylph” ascended soon after 2 p.m., and although the breeze was
fresh the sky was clear, so that a fine view of the town, the Alster
and the Elbe was to be had immediately on rising. After letting go a
parachute and watching its downward course for ten minutes, Herr Zeise
drew forth a bottle of champagne which had been some years in his
cellar, and prepared us for a toast. It was not to be one of a personal
or flattering character, but a heartfelt sentiment called forth by the
country we were going in the direction of.

After discharging the cork which rolled away earthwards, Herr Zeise
with uplifted cap and radiant face which inspired us all with
enthusiasm, cried out “_Schleswig-Holstein lebe hoch_.” The other
Hamburgers cordially echoed the feelings expressed, and I was ready
myself to accord almost with anything, seeing that my companions were
so friendly and communicative.

After the glasses were replenished there was an interchange of
civilities in which the pilot was not neglected, and at three o’clock
we became rather more philosophical and took down the following
observations of elevation and time, although these little records in no
way interfered with conviviality and enjoyment:--

  Time.   Barometer.  Height in Feet.  Thermometer.
  3· 5     24·6·0         3348          10° R.
  3·10     24·3·2         3628
  3·15     23·0·4         3911
  3·20     23·10·7        4084
  3·25     23·11·3        4923           4° R.
  3·30     23·7·3         5433
  3·35     23·10·2        4185
  3·40     24·1·0         3850
  3·45     25·1·5         3786           6° R.

As we knew our direction was towards Kiel, I arranged just before 4
o’clock to descend, this was the more desirable from the fact that we
were surrounded with cloud and could not see far ahead or beneath. When
the balloon was within 600 feet of the earth, the report of several
small arms aroused our attention, especially when the discharge was
followed by the whirring of flying visitors in the shape of lead.

“Is it possible we have been shot at?” asked Dr. Braun.

I replied by begging the doctor to empty a bag of sand, and did so
myself as quickly as possible.

There was little doubt in my own mind that we had been made a target
of, because I distinctly heard the “Sylph” struck in the region of the
equator, and discovered holes in that part afterwards.

Our downward course having been checked, we glided in a slanting
direction towards the earth; but the attitude of the country people
confirmed the belief that we were viewed as hostile rather than
friendly visitors, and instead of the villagers greeting us as usual,
they kept aloof, fired, and were presently joined by others with
rifles, and had I not requested Herr Zeise to tell them we were friends
from Hamburg, we should no doubt have received another volley directed
at our own heads instead of the “Sylph.”

When this was explained the people ran to us and stated that they had
taken us for Danish spies, and had really shot at the balloon.

I now proposed that instead of letting off the gas two of us should go
a little farther.

Herr Zeise was allowed by general consent to have the preference, the
other gentlemen being anxious to get back and report themselves.

We took in some earth to make up for the loss of weight, but the
Holsteiners very correctly guessed that by ascending again we were
not over well satisfied with our reception, notwithstanding the
explanations about being taken for Danes.

We left the place where we were fired into at 4h. 27m., after which the
following readings were taken of the second voyage:--

  Time.  Barometer.  Height in Feet.  Thermometer.
  4·45     24·6·0        3306            5° R.
  4·50     23·7·3        4378
  4·55     23·1·7        4950            3° R.
  5· 0     23·6·8        4430
  5·15  descended near Kiel.

It was only the lateness of the season that prevented the repetition
of my autumnal ascents; the public were anxious that they should
not cease, and the seats in the car were bespoken for at least
half-a-dozen trips. I determined then to re-commence in the spring of
1850, and went back to England in order to spend the winter at home.

In the year 1850 I returned to Hamburg, and before ascending gave
lectures on aërostation at the _Ton Halle_, after which a new cirque
was erected outside the _Dammthor_, where I made several ascents.

When the fine weather commenced two or three distinguished men came
northward on purpose to accompany me. The first was Count Schaffgotsch,
of Berlin, a scientific man and well-known amateur chemist. The Count,
by his own wish, was the only passenger on May 22nd, when we journeyed
into Hanover.

On May 26th Count Paul Esterhazy did me the honour of taking a seat by
my side, and opposite to us sat Captain James, an Englishman, and a
merchant of Hamburg.

We had a splendid trip in the direction of Lubeck, and there was one
incident attending it which vastly pleased the Hungarian nobleman, and
produced no small amount of excitement at our descent.

As we were travelling rapidly in the direction of the East Sea it was
necessary to come to an anchorage, after emerging rather suddenly from
a dense cloud. On the leeward side of a wood a good landing place
was descried, but in scudding over the tree tops the grapnel caught
a lofty branch, and the “Sylph” was brought up unexpectedly while we
were yet hovering over the forest. There were only two courses open
to us for getting free; the first was to slip the cable and leave the
grapnel behind; the second remedy was for one passenger to descend the
rope and loosen the iron, and get down the tree as best he could. My
own duty consisted in remaining by the “Sylph,” for the guidance of
the remaining passengers, but fortunately Captain James was ready for
the emergency, and dashed over the side of the car in British seaman
fashion, lowering himself away hand under hand as we cheered him down
until he was lodged in the branches, and reported that he could push
out the flukes of the grapnel in a “brace of shakes.”

The noble fellow lost his hat in descending, which was blown away and
stuck in a bough.

Before the iron was pushed out, I asked what height Captain James had
to go down and whether he could manage the tree.

“Never mind me,” said the sailor, “look out for a lurch and do not go
far, as I shall be rather out of my reckoning when I get below.”

Having cleared the trees I threw open the valve to its full extent, and
we made good a landing not far from the place where James landed on the
tree top.

Two or three men were immediately sent to the wood with Mr. H----, our
fellow voyager, to assist Captain James.

Some hundreds of country people collected in an incredibly short time,
and before the gas had escaped, another hundred or two bore down upon
us with an object of attraction in the shape of a sturdy but rather
short man with a white kerchief bound round his head. The mob appeared
to be impressed with the belief that the robust stranger was either
wrong in his head or injured in that part.

He came tripping along with a firm and buoyant gait, but had evidently
lost temper, and his hat into the bargain.

“Do pray,” said Captain James, “assure these good people, that I am
uninjured, some of them saw me come down the tree rather sharp, and no
doubt take me for an orang-outang, others imagine my figure-head is
smashed--do tell them I am all right, and as lively as a kitten.”

“Of that I am sure they have had convincing proof; remove your
handkerchief and they will then see that your head is as sound as need
be.”

The Captain did so, and when the country people comprehended that he
had lost his hat, a cap was tendered for his use, which was accepted
and paid for.

After accomplishing other voyages from Hamburg, I directed my steps to
Hanover with the intention of travelling south, so as to reach Vienna.

The only spot in Hanover where an ascent was practicable, happened to
be a public garden, situated on the Marien Island, and pretty well
adapted for the required purpose. One drawback only to this locality
was a formidable row of poplar trees, over which the balloon would
have to pass in case the wind blew towards them. The very first time
the “Sylph” was announced to rise from Hanover, which was on July 3rd,
the wind blew fiercely in the direction of the high trees. The filling
took place about twenty yards from their base, and the gas flowed
freely, so that at the appointed time, the silken globe was distended
fully, and but one sentiment prevailed throughout a large assemblage,
which was the certainty of the “Sylph” being dashed against the trees
as it rose in so strong a wind. To say that I did not share in this
grave apprehension would be untrue. I knew too well that it was hardly
possible to escape. The balloon rolled round and round in an alarming
way, after the retaining bags had been removed, and I expedited the
start, calling upon my proposed companions to bestir themselves, and
hasten into the car. The wind freshened every minute, and the tapered
poplar tops bent in frightful curves, showing the extreme pressure of
the atmosphere, and consequently, what was to be expected and guarded
against.

I placed a passenger at either end of the car, giving them each a large
bag of ballast, with instructions to discharge them the moment I said
No. 1 and No. 2. Then imparting a large amount of ascending power to
the “Sylph,” I waited as it rolled its huge volume about, until I saw
the tops of the trees comparatively unmoved by the wind, instantly I
pulled the trigger and up we bounded. A general shriek burst forth, and
not without reason, for the upper part of the balloon was struck by
a sudden gust and in another second it would have been wrecked among
the trees had not the orders to “let fall sand-bags” been splendidly
executed; for three of them, my own included, were plumped out
simultaneously, and there was a sharp vertical spurt in consequence;
this, however, did not altogether clear us, as the lower hemisphere of
the “Sylph” caught the yielding boughs, but the silk was well protected
by cordage, and the whole passed safely over, eliciting a shout of
satisfaction of the true sensational order.

We then bounded upwards with a pendulum-like movement, caused by the
car or centre of gravity being disturbed by the collision with the
branches; but this soon ceased, and I found that in less than three
minutes we were 4000 feet high.

I was glad that Herr Dorn, the director of the gas-works, was with me,
as he read the barometer while I took the necessary precautions to
allow for rapid expansion, which was taking place fast, owing to the
great weight we had lost in order to get over the trees.

When we steadied somewhat, and were moving in a horizontal direction
at an average height of about 6000 feet, I raised myself into the
ring, and, by a peep into the neck outlet, I felt satisfied that we
had sustained no fracture in the envelope, and this fact enabled
the passengers to feel pleased and composed, so that our feelings
afterwards were of the happiest kind, and when it was found that our
descent at _Celle_ was not accompanied with unpleasantness, as our
anchorage was effected on a high bough with grass beneath, we had every
reason to feel satisfied with our own good fortune and the behaviour
of the “Sylph,” which so nobly carried us over the trees and landed us
without a scratch.

At Celle we heard from an attaché to the King of Hanover that his
majesty had witnessed the ascent, and felt great concern for our safety
during those anxious moments when our lives were in jeopardy.

Notwithstanding that difficulty respecting the trees, a second
invitation went forth for another ascent on the 5th; but this time all
dread, as to a too intimate acquaintance with the poplars, entirely
ceased, as the air was in perfect repose; so much so, that it was
impossible to decide which way we should go, there being no clouds
to judge by, and as to other signs--such as the direction of smoke
and pilot balloons--even these were not faithful guides, as they rose
straight up and inclined to no fixed course, but wandered between
north, south, east, and west, as if totally becalmed in a balmy summer
atmosphere.

On being asked what sort of weather it was for aërial travelling, I
replied: “Superb! this is even a ladies’ day, when the return to _terra
firma_ need not cause the crushing of a daisy.”

As the inflation proceeded, I requested it to be intimated that at six
o’clock I should commence partial ascents.

Long before that time, the Marieninsel looked gay and inviting,
filled with a select company who were attentive to the performances
in the Summer Theatre, which forms so delightful a speciality at the
_alfresco_ amusements in Germany.

At the various rows of tables, the ladies sat working, and the fumes of
the gentlemen’s cigars rose high in the still air, while the strains
of music burst sweetly on the ears of the listeners, who calmly
awaited their evening enjoyments, as if nature and art were subdued by
oppressive heat, when the sun was declining behind the western foliage.

After the conclusion of the operatic piece, preparations for a captive
ascent drew a crowd of visitors to the lawn, and a party of ladies was
first formed, the young and handsome having induced the middle-aged
and portly to treat and accompany them in a short tour.

A blue-eyed English girl laughingly remarked: “If the rope were to
break, what should we do?”

“You would be transported with delight,” was my answer.

I was about to make some other silly observation, when my assistants
let up the balloon, and we were getting a view of the housetops.

Before our little pleasantry had ceased--in which one of the matronly
ladies took as lively a part as the British maiden--we found ourselves
being drawn down, when a second party was ready, with this difference,
that the sexes were equally divided, two gentlemen having each a lady
in charge.

Other parties were made up more quickly than they could be
accommodated, and altogether we had an hour and a half of this kind
of amusement, when the time for my final departure arrived, and the
gentlemen, who had for days previously booked their places, came
anxiously forward, fearing, as they stated, that the heroic courage
displayed by the first occupants of the car might possibly induce the
aëronaut to forget the gentlemen, and bear away with him the angels.

This opportune bit of flattery having been accepted, particularly
by the ladies who first ascended, I beckoned Herr Stecker and Herr
Frischen to join me, and we gently left the island at 7.30 amidst a
salvo of guns; and, after rising 600 feet perpendicularly, the “Sylph”
was wafted towards the palace, over which we remained suspended for at
least half-an-hour.

Afterwards the balloon remained in sight until the descent was made; by
that time it had assumed a small, dark, globular form, and was distant
fifteen miles from the place of setting out.

After I had repeated these exhibitions, I went to Dresden, and there
had the use of the Schutzenhaus Grounds.

On my first appearance, I was honoured by the presence of the Queen of
Saxony, and the Royal Family, as also the _élite_ of Dresden, who were
not disloyal, as can well be imagined. Dr. Meisel, my fellow-traveller,
had a pleasureable journey near to Oberau, where we landed.

On the 18th of August there was a second ascent when an architect, by
the name of Louis Prengel, was captivated into the enjoyments of cloud
scenery; this time we alighted near Pilnitz.

It must not be supposed that in this history I have fully described the
whole of my ascents; what I have proposed to accomplish, is an outline
of the more prominent features of my experience. I have not, therefore,
entered into every trip, but have sufficiently traced my movements from
year to year, so as to connect my travels from the time of my first
ascent to the date of writing my life. The conclusion with further
particulars, chiefly scientific, will, it is hoped, be published in a
subsequent volume.

Although I had intended to reach Vienna before the close of the season,
taking it in regular order, and going next to Prague, yet I found a
number of difficulties in Bohemia which induced me to reach Moravia as
quickly as possible, in order that I might take Brünn and the Austrian
capital before it got too late for the inhabitants to assemble in
places of public resort.

In Brünn, some weeks were spent before the necessary _erlaubnitz_ and
other preparations could be made.

At last I could find no better place than the gas-works, and although
the yard was not particularly sheltered from general view, still I
felt inclined to chance pecuniary success, as a great deal of interest
was manifested in the visit, and I was assured that all would go
prosperously if I would but make the trial.

I did so on September 22nd, and from the moment the gates were opened
there was an uninterrupted stream of visitors, which left my own mind
certain that I had not misplaced confidence in those who advised me to
speculate with boldness.

At a quarter to six, the “colossal machine,” as the Moravians called
the “Sylph,” rose towards the skies, with two gentlemen besides the
“air-captain.”

The voyage terminated near the village of Babetz.

Another successful ascent was made from the same spot on October
7th, when Herr Alexander Spindler and Herr Leopold Spitzer were my
companions. We let down a large parachute on this occasion, with a dog
in the car.

Leaving Brünn I made straightway for Vienna, where I learnt that an
exhibition would have to be made in the Prater, and that on no account
could I expect to have my balloon in any other spot.

Now the Prater was an excellent park-like ground for a spring or summer
gathering, but it was now getting late in October, and my only chance
was a more suitable locality in the inner town.

Just opposite the Palace was situated the Volks-garten, a fashionable
place of resort, well adapted for my purpose.

The lessee of this famous garden was an Italian, and I got a good
introduction to him, and proposed that he should have such an interest
in our exhibition, as would stimulate him to exertion, that is, to
obtain from the authorities permission to proceed.

This course answered, but a fresh obstacle arose as to the gas, there
were no pipes large enough to fill the balloon, but owing to the
kindness of the gas superintendent, and the readiness on my part to
incur a large outlay, we surmounted even this, and my first ascent came
off towards the latter end of October 1850.

The Emperor had left Vienna when I was there, otherwise he would have
seen the balloon from the palace windows.

Before the upper part of it was seen above the trees, the glacis around
the ramparts was filled with thousands of spectators.

In the gardens, were a gaily attired assemblage of military officers,
civilians, ladies, and children, so pleasingly blended as to costume
and appearance, that an Englishman could not fail to be struck with the
scene.

The applicant for a lofty view of Vienna was neither an illustrious
warrior, nor a robust citizen, but a fair young lady whose parents were
of respectable position, and who had persuaded her papa to visit me at
my hotel, and secure the first seat for his daughter.

The father, an amiable, sensitive man, was averse himself, as he
candidly stated, to his child going up, “but,” as he said with
affectionate emphasis, “she has been a good and dutiful daughter, and
this, the fixed idea of her life, must not be thwarted.”

Several hours before the stated time, a rumour gained ground, that
the lovely Fraülein was about to become the observed one at the
Volks-garten.

I fully expected that the young lady’s entrance to the car would be
the signal for a host of gallant fellows to step forward and beg the
privilege of a seat with so beautiful a creature, but no one stood
forth, and I felt almost certain of having the honours entirely to
myself, when a tug at my coat from some one outside the car caused me
to look behind.

I there beheld a young man looking pale and perplexed, who wanted to
know what the fee was for ascending. If my memory serves me right, I
mentioned a high price as I was annoyed with this candidate for not
presenting himself sooner.

The premium, however, did not deter the gentleman from getting in by my
side, and no sooner was he safely seated than I liberated the “Sylph,”
when loud and hearty were the hurrahs, and numerous the raised hats and
waving handkerchiefs in honour of the fair voyager.

Our course was directly over St. Stephen’s lofty tower, which is much
higher than St. Paul’s Cathedral, but which soon looked diminutive
beneath us.

The lady, when I invited her to do so, was most observant, but the
gentleman regarded with indifference the opening panorama, while I
could not but notice that his attention was engrossed by the Fraülein,
and indeed to such an extent that I proposed he should sit by her side
so as to relieve her from glances so direct and full of meaning.

The gentleman assented readily to my proposition, and sprang so
quickly from my side to that of the young lady, as fairly--or rather
unfairly--to make the car spring again.

When we had passed over the city and were drifting down the Danube, I
called upon my passengers to observe a fine view towards the East, the
young lady already had her eyes directed that way, but the gentleman
never once looked down, but continued to direct an admiring glance
towards the Fraülein’s features, exclaiming all the while, “Beautiful,
beautiful,” by which I very naturally inferred that he did not mean the
distant landscape, but the pleasing form so near to him in a cloudless
sky.

Now when we lost the busy hum of the capital and traversed a country
route, I proposed the Fraülein’s health, and, to do the gentleman
credit, he complied with alacrity to the suggestion and offered to do
the honours to a bottle of my own champagne, but before the cork was
set at liberty, a neat basket was uplifted by the young lady and in a
moment some delicious cakes and a bottle of Hungarian wine diverted our
gaze, and what to do the gentleman knew not. He inclined, however, to
the fair one’s wine; indeed, we both patronized the refreshing draught,
which was sweet and unexpected.

The Fraülein on her part was kind enough to say something pretty about
me and my kindness, but the gentleman never said Hoch! and I believe
he wished he could have managed the balloon himself and dispensed with
my services. However, though we had high words, we did not fall out,
but returned to terra-firma capital friends, and so considerate was I
of the heroine’s personal comfort, that immediately on landing in a
grass field, I begged the gentleman to fetch a conveyance, and talked
to her myself until he returned; I then begged of him to convey the
Fraülein to the nearest hotel while I emptied the balloon, promising to
join them by the time coffee would be served at Kaiser-Ebersdorf where
we descended. There is only one other point connected with this event,
which it is absolutely necessary to mention, and that is, that about
six months after this aërial excursion, my two companions were united
in the bonds of matrimony, and that on hearing of this, I understood
most fully why it was that the gentleman was heedless of terrestrial
objects, and so remarkably observant of heavenly.

After this admirable and romantic commencement in the Austrian capital,
my prospects for a continuance of good fortune was as bright as could
well be wished. The papers and the public were as busy as possible
about the adventure, and wondering who would go up next; when I
received an intimation that the authorities would not permit another
ascent so close to the palace, as the collection of an immense mass
of people on the glacis must not be repeated--the Emperor having
returned--but that His Majesty wished that I would ascend during the
next spring from the Prater.

The order of the day was, of course, ready compliance, but the cost
to me was great, although the first attempt had brought in a handsome
return, and but for this prohibition I might have realized another
goodly sum.

I now decided upon returning to Berlin for the winter; but it was
difficult to get away, as the principal railroad was monopolized daily
by the Austrian soldiery, who at that time were about to demonstrate
their forces in front of the Prussians, without, however, coming to
those heavy blows which have been exchanged since, in battles fought on
the very ground I have travelled over in my balloon.

In the spring of 1851, instead of going home to see the Great
Exhibition, I followed up my advantages in Germany and recommenced in
Berlin, where I again made several ascents. The most extraordinary as
far as danger went, was one from the Schutzenhaus in April.

There was a Prussian labourer who became my inveterate enemy, because I
had engaged him as a right-hand man, and had discharged him afterwards
for bad conduct. From urgent intercession I had taken him on again for
a fresh trial, and although I never liked the look of the fellow, yet
somehow he cajoled me, and being very handy and ingenious, I suffered
those unfailing first warnings to go by unheeded.

On a splendid evening I ascended in company with Mr. Lacy, Mr. Accum,
and Herr Henkel.

When we reached an elevation of about 3000 feet, it became expedient
to open the valve; on pulling the cord, one of the top shutters broke
and remained open, leaving an area for escape of twenty-six inches
by twelve, which allowed so large a volume to pass out that a rapid
descent commenced, which all our ballast could not check.

I lost no time in doing everything that was possible for our safety,
but the escape of sustaining power became so great that one-half of the
“Sylph” was deprived of gas; the result being, that our fall was so
rapid and perilous, that nothing short of a favourable open spot saved
us from broken bones. Fortunately, in one respect, we came down in a
well cultivated garden, and the car coming on to a fruit tree the shock
was lessened, so that none of us were hurt.

It came out afterwards, that this scoundrel was seen to tamper with,
and indeed partially sever the connecting lines of the valve, by which
diabolical act we might all have lost our lives.

The next noteworthy voyage was from Berlin into East Prussia, in the
direction of Dantzig; a run of nearly 200 miles in about five hours,
characterized this truly pleasurable tour.

I had with me Herr Hildebrandt, artist to the King of Prussia, and Herr
Henkel.

After we had been up twenty minutes, we came within view of the river
Oder. “So soon,” exclaimed Hildebrandt, “why it is twenty-five English
miles from the city, we must be travelling at railway speed.”

“Yes, we are, and a great deal faster than railway speed in Germany.”
Although the wind was strong, there was no perceptible motion in the
car. A stream of murky-looking cloud was drifting along towards the
Baltic, and fine moist mist frequently surrounded us as we dipped into
the vapour, but the barometer showed that it was more than 1600 feet
thick, as we occasionally varied that much in altitude without emerging
into sunlight, or within view of the earth.

After we had been up two hours I let out some gas, to see if any of the
villages or landmarks would present a familiar aspect to either of the
voyagers; but they confessed to having passed beyond any place they
were acquainted with.

As we had far exceeded the ordinary limits of a public trip, I proposed
that we should go on all the time we could see land in advance.

By and bye, darkness set in apace, and we could just discern--towards
the north-west--a line of coast to the left of our apparent route. From
what we could make out of the land, it was not highly cultivated or
thickly populated.

There was a residence ahead which it was desirable to approach, and I
lowered with that intention.

Our landing was rough but secure, and we were brought up in a hedge
surrounding a sort of common, with a house distant a mile or so, having
lights in the windows.

When the gas was let off by our united aid, we steered for the house,
leaving the balloon on the ground until we could get assistance.

In proceeding up a cross country lane, no inhabitant of the wild
strange place was met, and we were anxious to ascertain where we
were, and how far we had travelled. Not until the iron gates of a
baronial-looking seat came in view, did we hear voices.

Neither our questions, bearing, nor manner were pleasing to the
gate-keepers; they evidently regarded us with suspicion; and when we
stated that we came from the clouds in a balloon, and had left Berlin
that afternoon, our story created doubt and caution.

“If you will take my card to the Baron,” said Herr Hildebrandt, “I
daresay we shall be admitted to his presence.”

The card was sent up, and the Baron himself came down, but further
explanation was required before the gates were widely opened. I
happened to have the Berlin “_National Zeitung_” in my pocket, of that
day’s impression, which could not have reached the neighbourhood by the
time we arrived.

“But where is your balloon?” enquired the Baron, “I have not seen or
heard of it.”

“We not long since descended on a barren waste of land some half hour
since.”

“Enter gentlemen, and I will call together a number of the household
and assist you to recover the balloon and bring it up to the Hall.”

Lanterns were at once procured, a couple of horses with a cart put to,
and, with half-a-dozen followers, the Baron and ourselves repaired to
the common; but alas! all was blank and desolate.

The difficulty of finding the balloon then presented itself to our
minds, and we looked like the veriest impostors when we were rather
sharply interrogated as to where the property was situated.

As the only hope of finding it was by catching the disagreeable
odour of the gas, I volunteered myself to go forth like a hound and
endeavour to find it by the assistance of the nasal organ.

I was wandering almost in despair when I caught the aroma, or whatever
else one may style it, and cried out lustily, “Here it is.” The
searching party came up in a trot, and when once the Baron ascertained
the truthfulness of our statements, he shook hands warmly and escorted
us to the Hall, where we were treated with every kindness, and had beds
provided, and a carriage in the morning, until we came to a place where
extra post was to be met with.

Several other ascents were made in Berlin before I left, but being
anxious to visit Prague I made the best of my way thither while the
summer was yet in its prime, and after exhibiting the “Sylph” first of
all partially filled with atmospheric air I then arranged an ascent,
and having in that town a good friend in the person of Herr Leonhart, a
gentleman very fond of aërostation who had ascended with me before, all
went swimmingly, and my first appearance before a Bohemian assemblage
was made on the 13th of July, when we ascended and travelled forty
miles in two hours.

Two or three other ascents took place in Prague before I left, but on
reaching Vienna I was taken ill, and before I recovered it became too
late to avail myself of the Emperor’s hint to visit the Prater.

My next movements were directed to Leipsig, where I intended to do
business during the great October fair.

My reputation, such as it was, preceded me, for I found the newspapers
already welcoming my arrival, and speaking of my numerous ascents in
Germany in a liberal and encouraging tone.

The gas-works’ yard was again the only available place to get the
balloon filled in quickly.

Leipsig, after the business fair, wears a very animated appearance.
About 80,000 strangers visited the town at this time, and everything
good and legitimate in the way of art and science is sure to meet with
its reward.

The date of my first experiment at the gas-works was September 28th.
Dr. v. Keller, an inhabitant of the town, and a scientific man, was my
first patron; he wrote an excellent account of what he saw and felt, in
one of the local newspapers, and this had the effect of causing others
to ascend in the several journeys I made afterwards.

On the second occasion, Dr. William Hamm joined me, and subsequently
Herr Andra, Herr Flinsch, and Herr Gerber, were passengers.

Before I left, an amusing novelty came off at the Great Hall, in the
shape of a balloon concert.

The “Sylph” was about two-thirds inflated with a wind machine in the
centre of the Hall, and a regular band, headed by myself, entered
through the neck valve, one by one, and then played a number of tunes
to the delight of a large company.

This was my last undertaking in the year 1851, after which, in order to
comply with the earnest wishes of my wife, whose health was delicate,
and who craved for Old England, I bade adieu to Germany, and resolved
to pursue ballooning in the country of my birth, notwithstanding the
discouraging taunts of a few of my relations.


1852.

The votaries of ballooning, like the followers of any other pursuit,
have their mutual jealousies. The renowned Mr. C. Green was, at the
above date, gradually relinquishing aëronautic duties. Age was steadily
creeping upon the veteran, and ambition was prompting one or two others
to prove themselves competitors and scientific successors. Lieutenant
Gale had lost his life after ascending from Bordeaux, and his patron,
Mr. Goulston, had determined to follow aërostation enthusiastically.
This latter gentleman was not what the public would style a mere
professional balloonist, but an aspirant, who was well to do in the
world as a floor-cloth manufacturer. On returning from the continent,
I gave Mr. Goulston a friendly call, as we had more than once been up
together, and much enjoyed a chat about our favourite study. I then
learnt that it was his intention to make ascents from Cremorne Gardens,
as well as other places, and that the probability being that I should
go abroad again, he imagined that we should not oppose each other.

I distinctly remember objecting to this idea as to my own movements,
stating as a reason that I had myself some tempting offers to ascend in
and about the Metropolis. I promised, moreover, if he was determined to
take the West, that I would try my fortune in the East of London.

Mr. Goulston was the proprietor of the balloon “La Normandie,” and he
had just built a new one of smaller capacity, which was about to make
its maiden ascent in the forthcoming Whitsun holidays, from Belle Vue
Gardens, Manchester.

Strange to say, the very first attempt proved fatal. Mr. Goulston, who
ascended in a strong wind was dashed against some stone walls, and lost
his life.

He had, it appeared, a very imperfect grapnel for stopping the balloon,
but whether he attempted to get out of the car, or not, could hardly be
ascertained, although he was known to have determined upon some scheme
by which he thought it possible to let the balloon go to the mercy of
the wind, whilst endeavouring to save himself by springing from the car.

This untoward beginning was the means of bringing the ill-fated balloon
into my notice very shortly after this sad event.

Mr. Goulston had engaged to use it at Cremorne Gardens; intimations
of an intended ascent had been published in the newspapers, and I was
immediately applied to for an ascent with my own balloon in the place
of Mr. Goulston who was killed.

Mr. Simpson, the lessee, then informed me that Mrs. Goulston had
applied to him to purchase the balloons, but he would be glad to have
my judgement as to the value and construction of the smaller balloon,
in which the aëronaut had lost his life.

On examination, I found it to be of good make and material, and
when I was asked if I would ascend in it, I unhesitatingly replied:
“Certainly, provided I use my own grapnel and ropes.”

After I had made a few trips with it, the accident could no longer be
attributed to imperfections in the aërial machine, and it was purchased
by Mr. Simpson, and named the “Prince of Wales.” It thus happened, most
unexpectedly on my part, that the West-end gardens, as well as those in
the East, were at my command.

Having overcome the objection, which owing to family scruples I had
formerly felt, to appear professionally in England, I made up my mind,
that having once done so, I would go ahead, and make as many ascents as
possible during the season of 1852.

Although it was the year after the Exhibition, and there was not much
to be done, as my good advisers supposed, yet I resolved to show that
it was possible to make more ascents in one year, than had been made by
several aëronauts, during the past three or four seasons.

I made arrangements, therefore, to ascend from the New Globe Gardens,
Mile End Road, not far from the site of the People’s Palace, also from
the Eagle Establishment, City Road, and from the new grounds, which had
just been started at North Woolwich, under the name of the Pavilion
Gardens.

What with Cremorne and the above named localities, I ascended three or
four times in a week, and at the termination of 1852, added thirty-six
voyages to my former ascents, which dated in rapid succession from my
first as an amateur in the year 1844.

There was one peculiarity about the ballooning at North Woolwich, which
caused a fund of amusement on the Thames and the garden esplanade; this
consisted in crossing over from the gas-works at Woolwich, the car
being fastened in a ferry boat with a steam-tug ahead, which towed the
balloon across the river to the Pavilion Gardens.

On one occasion I was engaged somewhere else, when the directors
particularly wanted an ascent. I recommended an aëronaut with whom I
had long been acquainted, and the way he acknowledged my kindness was
by finding fault with the manner I moved my balloon, offering at the
same time to show the real and scientific style of doing it properly.
But this aëronaut lost his balloon in the attempt, it bounded away out
of control, burst in the air, and came down a wreck.

My concluding ascents in 1852 took place at Glasgow. Mr. Maxwell, my
_compagnon de voyage_ on the second ascension on October 14th 1852,
confirms the account descriptive of our own feelings, and which is
a very fair representation of other people’s when they go up in a
balloon. A few extracts will be useful, as they apply generally to the
subject.

“Before taking a seat in the car for the first time, imagination is
busy picturing the scenes and sensations which belong to an aërial
voyage. However great one’s courage may be, there are always little
fears as to personal safety, and it is owing to this feeling before
starting, that the first great impression is made on the mind, when
the traveller finds, on rising, that the transition is not accompanied
by any of those disagreeable emotions which most persons are apt to
connect with that mode of travelling. As the balloon leaves the ground,
two-fold astonishment seizes the mind, first--as to the vastness and
splendour of the view, secondly--that the effect produced in looking
down is not what would be supposed, judging from lofty surveys on the
tops of high buildings, in fact, fear is lost in admiration, and there
is a joyous consciousness of safety, which favours calm observation.

“The earth presented to our view an immense concave surface, that part
immediately beneath being the deepest, this variegated picture may be
compared to a map. A certain degree of confusion, however, attends
one’s early efforts to recognise particular localities, and here it was
that the aëronaut surprised me by the facility with which he pointed
out the leading features of Glasgow, although they were new to him.

“First he directed attention to the Clyde, pointing out the different
ship-building yards, and mentioning the names of the proprietors. Anon
he took me round the squares, along the streets, up to the railway
station, and off to the distant country. I was bold enough to inquire
how it was Mr. C---- was enabled to trace Glasgow and its surroundings
with such accuracy, having made only one ascent previously. ‘I will
tell you,’ he replied, ‘I always make it my business before ascending,
to acquire every possible information as to a strange locality,
much is to be obtained from local maps, &c., but more from personal
observations as to public buildings, thoroughfares, roads, and other
conspicuous objects, which once seen, familiarise themselves again in
the bird’s-eye view, and thereby lead to detection.’

“So model-like and regular was the face of the city, that it was
difficult to reconcile the belief that there, beneath, lay the thrifty,
solid-built, populous port of Glasgow.

“A view from on high is certainly a great leveller of human
distinction--the contrast of a splendid residence with a humble
dwelling is not very great when viewed from the range of the clouds,
nor do lofty spires, hallowed walls, or public monuments, command,
however much they deserve, that respect which they are accustomed
to receive below. Everything is reduced to the smallest possible
dimensions, preserving, notwithstanding, distinctness of form and
outline.”

We descended at the village of Cryston; Robert Kaye, Esq., of Mill
Brae, was present, rendering material assistance, and invited us to
take refreshment at his house.

In a third trip from Glasgow, in which Mr. Maxwell again accompanied
me, Duncan McIntyre was initiated into the enjoyments of ballooning; a
few extracts of his own version of the scene will sufficiently bring it
within view.

“After having witnessed the ascents made by Mr. H. Coxwell on the 9th
and 13th of October, I had no hesitation in making arrangements for a
trip with him on the 18th instant.

“Almost immediately on leaving, the aëronaut commenced a most
entertaining lecture on aërostation, and described graphically, the
beautiful scene which gradually opened out to our view.

“The tortuous winding of the Clutha, appeared like a small rivulet,
dotted here and there with Liliputian steamers. Dumbarton with its
ship-building yards and ancient Castle-Greenock, in the distance, with
its forest of shipping, were all seen to great advantage, although on
the same dwarfish scale. On ascending still higher, the country, to my
inexperienced eye, assumed a somewhat concave appearance, reminding me
of the plains of South America, and for miles there was not apparently
an eminence of a foot high; but this deceitful appearance was fully
explained by our enterprising captain, who pointed out many places and
informed us of their height.

“Near to Garscube bridge, Mr. Maxwell left the car, as we wished to go
much higher than we had been, and this time the captain took a variety
of observations with his instruments, by which he told me of the
degrees of cold, and our height in feet, a few of which I put down in
my pocket book; for instance, just before we entered a cloud, though I
had not observed it overhead, I was requested to button up my coat, as
the thermometer had fallen fourteen degrees, and we were three-quarters
of a mile high, and in another minute we should enter a cloud, and
there it would be ten degrees colder still. I remember he said we were
then more than a mile high.

“Our descent was made in a masterly style about half a mile west of
Milngaire. It is worthy of remark that this is the same field in which
Mr. Sadler, twenty-nine years ago, made his descent, and still more
remarkable, it was the same man who caught the rope of Mr. Sadler’s
balloon, who performed a similar service for us.”

After the three ascents already recorded, I made one more in
conclusion, and it is no vain exaggeration to assert, that my first
season in London, besides my numerous ascents previously as an amateur,
did actually comprise a greater number of trips than any three
balloonists had made, even in the preceding exhibition year.


1853.

During the summer months I maintained the interest in aërostatics
by numerous voyages, and although they did not exceed twenty-two in
number, still they furnished fresh experiences, and enabled me to take
up more than fifty passengers.

One of the most remarkable was an ascent from the New Globe Pleasure
Grounds, Mile End Road. The date fixed for the fête was October 16th,
but it was a wet and windy morning, which caused postponement notices
to be got out, but no sooner were they delivered into the hands of
the bill-sticker and his assistants, than a gleam of sunshine shot
forth, and the drift of the clouds betokened a favourable break,
while a low, but steady, barometer, together with a slight shift in
the wind, induced all parties interested to suspend movements until a
consultation had been held, as to what was to be the order of the day.
The workmen were at their posts ready to proceed, the foreman of the
gas-works was awaiting the word to turn on. My own assistant stood by
the balloon, anxious to unfold at a moment’s notice.

In the Board Room were myself, the gas-engineer, and the proprietor of
the gardens in earnest discussion, as to whether or not it was too late
to fill the balloon. Extra pressure was promised, and a little pressure
of another sort was put on me, so that the decision was to proceed.

Biscuits and a hasty glass of sherry were served, when out we all
sallied into the grounds, which were now steaming from the rarefaction
caused by the sun, which had burst forth with an unmistakable
intention of shining uninterruptedly until sunset.

I having raised my hand to go on, the “Sylph” was brought forth, the
tube was connected with all available speed, and in less than an hour
we presented a bold aspect; it quickly buzzed abroad that the balloon
was filling, and that, despite rain and wind, the ascent would be made.
The bills, of course, were not posted.

When six o’clock struck, and several watches were examined, numerous
were the shakes of the heads as to the state of the balloon; it was
not more than half full, and as it rolled and flopped about in the
high wind, everyone saw that it was not in a fit state to ascend, and
less still, to offer a compact resistance to the freshening gusts.
Another half hour’s flow turned the tide in its favour, and produced
the required ascending power, but there was nothing to spare, and when
I let go the last connecting cord, a violent puff of wind caught the
balloon sideways, driving it rather down than up, and although two
bags of sand were discharged, it still dashed along at a frightful
pace, when every beholder saw that a stack of chimnies and the car
must inevitably clash; and so they did--but I had thrown myself into
position just previous to the moment of contact, and, although the
bricks and mortar were hurled downwards, the “Sylph” shot clear away
and mounted gaily to an immense elevation, so that by the time I
was over the Houses of Parliament, the wind being east, I found my
barometer had fallen five inches, and that temperature had decreased
just nineteen degrees, by which I knew that I should continue an upward
movement for at least another six thousand feet, owing to the space
left for expansion, unless I confined the balloon to the same level
by the use of the valve. As I had no object in going very high, I
attempted with the cord a slight check, but neither the customary pull
nor an extra tug would open the valve. It then struck me that in the
hurry of making a beginning my assistant had allowed a fold to form
itself in the silk, which prevented the valve-shutters from opening,
on looking up through the neck internally, I observed that this was
the case, so I determined to allow the balloon to rise and come down
without any interference on my part, but in so doing I had to go nearly
as far as Basingstoke, before a downward inclination took place.

Soon after the first dip, I noticed a splendid meteor, which was below
the level of the car, and apparently about six hundred feet distant--it
was blue and yellow, moving rapidly in a north-easterly direction and
became extinguished without noise or sparks.

It is just possible that the apparent closeness of this meteor was
illusory, and that the real distance was very many miles; its size was
half that of the moon, and I could not but feel that if such another
visitor were to cross my path, the end of the “Sylph” and its master
would be at hand.

The range of temperature was 35°, it being 54° at starting, and 19° at
the greatest elevation, viz, two and a half miles.

The car touched the earth soon after 8 o’clock, but it was dark, and
no signs of habitation were at hand; I shouted lustily to see if any
labourers were within hail, but no one appeared to hear me, or see the
balloon. Being quite out of my latitude and longitude, I was naturally
curious to ascertain my whereabouts.

I resolved upon a last effort, and having charged my lungs fully
I cried out “Air balloon,” some half-dozen times, but getting no
encouragement by a response I made up my mind to settle down in the
car, and do the best I could to procure rest.

But there were matters requiring immediate attention and of greater
importance than sleep, the first was the reduction of the “Sylph” in
point of bulk; now it is not exactly an easy matter to get all the gas
out of a balloon single-handed; when the valve drops to the ground
the gas will not escape unless it is pressed out by men holding down
the network, and, as I had no such assistance, I got thus far and no
farther; the wind, however, had abated, so that my silken companion
presented very much the appearance of a whale.

I drew some part of the loose folds over the car, and then remembered
the kind attention of Mr. Gardner, the lessee of the Gardens, who
always made up for me something to comfort the inner man before I
ascended. This time there was a beef sandwich with a liberal supply of
mustard and pepper, but it was not too hot, nor was the pocket pistol,
containing brown brandy and water, at all dangerous, for it was rather
needed, the cold weather aloft having chilled one somewhat; whilst
good Mr. Gardner’s basket, and its truly acceptable contents, produced
a glow of gratitude which prompted me, the moment I had unscrewed the
flask, to drink to his long life and happiness. I did so twice, and
after having taxed the reserve sandwich I felt myself a fresher and
more thoughtful man.

The next question was, whether it would be well to turn in where I was
for the night, or strike out by the nearest road for assistance.

There would be no harm, I thought, in taking a short reconnoitre as far
as the boundaries of the field I was in possession of; it being dark, I
could only by close inspection ascertain how the ground lay.

At the further extremity I came upon a gate and a bye lane; now if
I pursued this, wouldn’t it lead to a farm house? And if I placed a
stone, or, as I did, a chalk and flint opposite the gate in the centre
of the lane, shouldn’t I be able to see it on my return?

The argument was conclusive, I struck out in a sanguine spirit, and
after a quarter of an hour’s cautious walking came to a farm with a
light in one window; bravo! there was a yard wall surrounding the
premises, but the stile was visible, and I mounted step after step,
determined to knock or ring them up.

But gracious goodness! what dark object was that springing at my throat
with a fierce growl?

A bounding, unchained, Newfoundland dog had never entered my dreams.

I confess to being both surprised and alarmed, and to having beat, or
attempted to do so, one of the most expeditious retreats on record. If
recollection serves me correctly I fairly bolted, but whether I stopped
before the flint stone tripped me up or not I cannot say.

Halting at the outside of the gate, and seizing the big flint in my
right hand, I breathed more freely, and was not displeased when I
ascertained that I had no followers.

Having satisfied myself that the balloon was more quiet than the hound,
discretion preached an out-door discourse as to being the better part
of valour, and I assented by making up my mind to experimentalise with
sleep. A ballast bag or two were now filled with hedge-row gatherings
to be used as pillows.

I stretched myself nearly at full length in the car and went earnestly
in for a doze. I believe, too, that the first stage of it was duly
entered upon, when voices in the distance were indistinctly heard
through the wicker-work.

I sprang up, casting aside the curtains of oiled silk, and listened
attentively. Yes, there were men in the next field, they had doubtless
seen and followed the balloon; to welcome them would be most expedient.

“Hallo there! here I am and the balloon as well.”

No sooner had I delivered this piece of information than I heard
a voice say, “Hush!” Receding footsteps in an irregular stampede
followed, and I was left in wonderment as to what it all meant.

I came to the conclusion that a gang of poachers were in the
neighbourhood, and that I had disturbed their operations at the very
outset.

After shouting again and again, I heard no more of the strange voices
or footsteps; I determined upon again sallying forth, but this time in
the opposite direction, when I armed myself with the liberating iron, a
powerful weapon, and, if used dexterously, far more to be dreaded than
a policeman’s truncheon.

Having again deposited another white stone in the lane opposite the
gate, I walked for at least a mile, when I came to a village green
having a pond at one side and cottages in the distance.

It had struck eleven o’clock when I heard some men approaching, and
although they were not exactly steady still I was glad to meet with
anyone for information’s sake, and for assistance in the packing up.

“Here my man, be good enough to inform me what place this is, I am a
stranger and require assistance.”

“But you surely know where you are?”

“No, the fact is I’ve just popped down here in a balloon, and I require
help.”

“Oh, that’s it; well, if you go to the ‘Red Lion’ down the street I
daresay you’ll get what you want; the landlord is a retired fighting
man, and he’ll put you to rights in no time.”

While I was in the act of laughing, my suspicious adviser moved off
in an evident state of doubt and alarm, so I pressed forward down the
street, and was glad to hear the measured steps of a policeman.

As he appeared I thus accosted him:--

“Officer, I am glad to have met you, being a stranger and not knowing
what _county_ I am in. I have just----.”

The bull’s eye was immediately turned, and my liberating iron scanned,
when the policeman backed a step or two and said, “Oh, you don’t know
what county you’re in, don’t ye. Well, I should think you know the
county gaol pretty well.”

Whether it was the provoking way in which I burst out laughing, or
my close resemblance to some criminal character, I cannot say, but
the officer drew himself together as if he were about to encounter a
robber, and before I could speak with becoming gravity he held up his
lantern and assured me that if I did not immediately move off out of
the village he should take me to the station house.

“That’s just where I am going either with or without you as an escort,”
I said; “but mind what you are about officer, the fact is, I have
descended in a balloon not far from here this evening, and I have come
for assistance. Which, pray, is the ‘Red Lion’?”

“I thought,” rejoined the policeman, “You didn’t know what county you
were in; we had quite enough of you fellows a fortnight ago, and if you
hang about here I shall take you into custody.”

“Do so at your peril,” I cried, holding up my iron defiantly.

The officer continued his beat as if he were perplexed as to my
business in that part of the country; I observed that he kept his eye
upon me, and turned round occasionally as he went up the street.

I failed to obtain an entrance into the “Red Lion,” nor did I see
anyone to ask where the station house was, and as the persons met with
appeared semi-savages, I became anxious about the balloon, and decided
upon going back and having a parting word with the policeman.

That official, however, was not to be seen, he had either gone further
on the road, or he was watching me from some unseen place.

On recognizing the stone, and regaining the field, sleep was once more
sought, and this time successfully.

I did not awake until voices were faintly heard in the morning.

I then peeped from my cage, and found that farm labourers were going to
work.

Feeling assured that they would pass the gate, notice the stone, and
then the balloon, I remained quiet, but could clearly discern the men
as they came to a dead halt, as if paralyzed with astonishment at the
strange appearance in the field.

“What be that Jim?” said the foremost man with one leg raised on the
gate.

“Dang’d if I know,” said another, “either the owld’un or sum’mut alive.”

“Let’s over and see lads.”

As the men approached the balloon their cautious movements and general
expression betokened fear.

When they first reached the car, I threw aside my covering, anxious to
convince them without further doubt, what it was they were gazing upon.

Whether or not I was too energetic, and sprang up like Jack in the box,
I cannot say, but the moment their eyes rested upon me they fled in
dismay.

I followed after them, urging that “it was only a balloon,” but the
affrighted ones jumped through a hedge-gap, and it was not until they
had drawn up on the other side, as if ashamed of their fear, that they
listened to what I had to say, and on regaining self-possession they
went back and examined for themselves; after getting reassured they
conducted me to their master, who invited me to breakfast.

While we were finishing our coffee, the farmer continually apologized
for the rude behaviour of his men, who were not at all polite.

Master Hector, the dog, kept eying and pawing me as if he would be
rough, but for the presence of the farmer.

After breakfast we drove over to Basingstoke, and called at the “Red
Lion” on our road to the railway station.

The landlord had heard a knocking the previous night, and had been
warned by the policeman of a dangerous-looking fellow being about, with
a house-breaker’s implement in his possession ready for use.

I showed him the liberating iron and explained its application, and who
I was, &c., when the ex-pugilist was much amused, and informed me why
the villagers were so cautious about strangers.

A fortnight previously, I learnt, several of the shops had been robbed
by a gang of London thieves, and most of them, as well as the police,
were apprehensive of a second visitation.

“Another thing,” said the burly landlord, “You must please not forget
that you have come among the Hampshire hogs, and that a grunt or two is
all in character.”

On putting me down at the railway station the farmer expressed his
regret that he had not heard my call when I descended, and that the
persons I sought information from were so unfriendly.

I told him that I had frequently met with almost similar receptions,
and that the treatment I had received was owing to the balloon not
having been seen in the air.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the story of my life represents thoughts and acts in childhood,
youth, and early experience, I have now to account for a break in the
narrative, which must leave off while barely touching the year 1853.
As there yet remains five and thirty years of my career to describe it
follows that I cannot do so in the present volume, which, to be candid,
owes its appearance to a circumstance which requires mentioning.

I had supplied my publishers with an article on Military Ballooning for
one of their magazines. This led to the question whether or not the
matter would lend itself to expansion for a small book, and as Military
and Meteorological Ballooning had revived in Paris, I expressed myself
ready to allude to the current topics of the day, and further stated
that I had written part of my life. It was then decided to connect the
two; but there is this striking contrast between the narrative and
the more matured remarks which are added, viz, that the former gives
faithfully the buoyant allusions to my early ascents in a gossiping,
anecdotal strain, whereas the following chapters are the more matured
opinions of later years.

I have noticed hitherto that ballooning best commends itself to general
readers when amusement is blended with instruction, and especially if
the scientific and practical part is introduced incidentally, so as to
avoid abstruse treatment and long calculations.

I must ask the reader’s indulgence to recollect that the writer
was born in 1819 (I ought perhaps, with becoming loyalty, to add
that considering this is the era of Her Majesty’s Jubilee, I had the
_honour_ of being born in that year). An apology is perhaps therefore
due for a mixed composition, and for the writer’s boyish views in the
earlier part, although it may not be unreasonably presumed that as I
have seen some service in trying to advance Aëronautic Science and
Military Ballooning, the latter remarks may have more value.

I may add that in a succeeding Volume my autobiography will be
continued and concluded.

[Illustration]




THE BEGINNING OF MILITARY BALLOONING.


Many articles have appeared on this subject, but they are mostly
concise compilations as to the dates of the employment of war balloons,
and there is yet wanting a more simple and systematic arrangement of
the order and particulars under which the respective balloons figured
in early aëronautic history.

I have endeavoured to supply these requirements and to add a few
practical and critical observations as to the merits and faults of the
various equipments and plans from an aëronautic standpoint; as this
kind of treatment may interest military aëronauts, and assist civilians
who are studying the matter, and it may also prove more attractive to
general readers who like to know what professional men have to say (in
friendly rivalry) as to the ideas of naval and military officers, who
have devoted attention to ballooning.

On the other hand military men, the young especially, who are apt
to conclude that veterans know very little compared with modern
tacticians, may find that in this speciality they are somewhat
mistaken, and that ballooning is not to be “picked up,” so to speak,
without having a regular and legitimate schooling in an art which so
very few understand.

  “One science only will one genius fit,
   So vast is art, so narrow human wit.”

The inventive genius of the French may be traced no less than their
intrepidity in their early efforts to apply the balloon to purposes of
warfare.

In the year 1793, a scientific committee was formed in Paris with this
object, when it was suggested that balloons should be used both for
attack and defence, and for ascertaining the movement of armies in the
field, and to get at the strength of fortified places.

Here was a clear and comprehensive plan for a new departure in military
science which the leading nations of Europe have been slow in imitating.

A great deal of doubt and ridicule have been cast upon those (myself
included), who, in different countries had the courage of their
convictions to urge such a movement upon the attention of those in
power.

Austria, whose forces first faced a war balloon at the battle of
Fleurus, directed her government not to neglect a bird’s-eye view of
the enemy.

Russia took up the idea pretty early.

Italy followed suit.

Germany was slow to move in the air, but has been steady and scientific
in carrying out her projects.

Old England, proverbially averse to new fangled notions, resisted
all overtures even from an experienced aëronaut for many years,
pooh-poohing this kind of feather-brained mode of strategy as at that
period imagined.

At last, after experiments had been made by Colonel Beaumont and myself
at Aldershot and Woolwich, a balloon corps was formed and permitted to
try their hand with calico balloons.

This new force, however, ignoring the first instructors most
persistently, ventured to teach the British army without recognized
balloonists to aid them; but one day, in an unfortunate hour, a war
balloon, while taking a preliminary canter, not, of course, in an
official capacity, dashed off on a dark December evening to sea, with
an enterprising and much lamented member of Parliament, who knew no
fear, but had a poor chance of being rescued from a watery grave.

Then, after this calamity, the British balloon force languished, but
not for long, as war clouds were to be seen in the East, where military
balloons should have been sent, particularly to Alexandria, but they
were not, nor to other places in which Lord Wolseley has himself
admitted that they might have proved very useful.

Our own progress at home and the activity displayed on the continent
form an instructive contrast, but if we want to ascertain and compare
the present with the past we must go back to the year 1793, and follow
on chronologically.

The Committee of Public Safety (an excellent kind of committee for
London adoption) gave their approval on condition that the gas should
be prepared without using sulphuric acid, as sulphur could ill be
spared on account of its being so much needed for the production of
gunpowder.

Guyton de Morveau showed that water could be decomposed by being forced
over red hot metal and borings in a retort, the oxygen being thus
separated from the hydrogen which was alone required for an inflation.

Experiments at Meudon were instituted under the direction of Guyton
de Morveau, Coutelle, and Conté. Their report led to the formation
of a company to be named the _Aërostiers_, who boasted a captain, a
sergeant-major, one sergeant, two corporals, and twenty men.

Coutelle was captain, and the aërostiers went to Meudon to be practised
in the aëronautic art. After the preliminary experiments Coutelle
was sent off to General Jourdan at Maubeuge with material for the
inflation, but he arrived at the moment when General Chasal was under
arrest for being involved in a plot to deliver the place to the enemy.
Jourdan threatened to shoot him as a spy, but he softened down, as
De Fonvielle relates, when he saw that Coutelle was not in the least
disconcerted, and ended by congratulating him on his zeal in the
defence of his country.

The balloon corps contained in its ranks, as indeed some of the modern
associations do, some rather singular individuals. We are told in
“Adventures in the Air” of a priest of Montmorency, whom the Reign of
Terror had driven to take refuge in the camp, but who only waited the
advent of more peaceable times to resume his cassock.

We may also mention Selles de Beauchamp, who entered the corps under
the name of Cavalier Albert, and who rose to the rank of officer, and
left interesting memoirs on the experiences of military balloonists.

The father of Beauchamp, an officer in one of the royal regiments, was
seriously wounded in Piedmont, where two of his brothers were killed;
he retired, moreover, and died in 1781, leaving a child six years old,
who, two years later, lost his mother also. As an orphan of fortune, as
soon as he was old enough, he was sent to the Harcourt College, where
he was treated as a youth of quality.

His tutor adopted zealously the revolutionary cause, while Beauchamp
stuck to the Court party. The latter, in attempting to leave the
country, was arrested and sent to the army of the Loire, but rather
than join it he engaged among the military balloonists, of whose life,
but for him, we should have known nothing, for the memoirs of Coutelle,
though very valuable from a scientific point of view, are too laconic,
and enter into no details.

To these various characters Coutelle added a certain number of
mechanics, whose services were indispensable. His first lieutenant,
Delaunay, was formerly a master mason, and proved useful in the
construction of furnaces, for it required no less than 12,000 bricks to
build the furnace for the manufacture of gas.

The process of inflation lasted from thirty-six to forty hours. I
may here call attention to the decided improvement which appears to
have been made in the generation and storage of hydrogen gas for the
English balloon force. Compressed gas is now supplied at Chatham in
metal receivers, which can be sent abroad, as it was to Suakim. This
plan has its advantages and difficulties. It must be very expensive,
and the weight of the cylinders is an objection where every ounce of
impedimenta has to be sometimes thought of.

The French balloons were made of silk, and so efficiently varnished
that they retained the gas for two to three months.

In this important element we are behind the French, as mere calico was
the first fabric used in the construction of the Woolwich balloons, and
though professional aëronauts for public ascents may sometimes resort
to cotton balloons, still for military objects, silk, although the most
costly, is, I should say, the lightest, strongest, tightest, and best.

We must allow for considerable exaggeration in the much vaunted
holding powers of the original French balloons, and, for the matter of
that, for the latest productions as well, both in England and on the
continent. I must include the Channel balloonists.

It is all very well to talk and write about such a volatile substance
as hydrogen, or even coal gas, remaining good for three months or a
month. Aëronauts deny it.

Will a volume of the lightest known fluid be fit for much after being
a fortnight or even a week in either a silk, skin, or so-called
india-rubber envelopes.

Until ballooning is divested of much that is absurd, untruthful, and
misleading, real progress will be slow.

The balloon “Entreprenant” which was sent to the army of the north
was only twenty-seven feet in diameter, and its lifting power was 500
pounds. It was held fast by two ropes which were attached to some extra
network at the equator; but considering that in those days the network
did not cover much more than half of the balloon, we should not fail to
notice that at present balloons are enveloped in much more extensive
and elongated nets which protect the lower hemisphere, and prevent the
escape of the balloon unless the network gives way. It is generally
made of thicker cord below, so that this danger is more guarded against
than it was in the year 1794.

The army of the Meuse-Sambre had the “Céleste” balloon, while the
“Hercule” and “Intrepide” were sent to the Rhine-Moselle.

The recent Naval Jubilee Review reminds one how interesting it would be
could the aërial fleet of the last century be inspected by the side of
the latest style of war balloons that England has produced.

I am not at all sure that comparisons would be in our favour. Fancy the
British army under an amateur!

On June 18th, when Coutelle reconnoitred the Austrian position, the
enemy fired at his balloon as it was ascending and descending.

From Maubeuge it was taken to Charleroi, floating at such a height as
to permit cavalry and other troops to pass beneath.

At the battle of Fleurus, in Belgium, on June 26th, 1794, two ascents
were made, each of about four or five hours, notwithstanding a strong
wind; the success of the French was said to be generally due to
observations from this balloon, as all movements were reported.

The balloonists were again brought into requisition in the campaign of
1795. The “Entreprenant” withstood an amount of buffeting which would
shatter a modern balloon to shreds; we are reminded of this by a high
French authority, and I am not prepared to dispute this bold assertion,
when we remember of what material some of the latest war balloons are
composed.

The strain on Coutelle’s balloon was lessened by attaching the cable
to horses and men, rather than to fixed objects.

Of course it was; there are secrets in every art, and I may here
mention a case in point as to the danger of a too rigid holdfast, which
happened to my large balloon, which I made at my own cost for The
British Association Experiments, in the year 1862.

While the committee at Wolverhampton, which included Professor Tyndall,
Lord Wrottesley, Dr. Lee, Mr. Glaisher, and others, were watching the
inflation during a high wind, I left the grounds for a short time, the
balloon being in charge of my assistants, who were manœuvring at the
nozzle of the lower opening, as that is a part requiring much care, and
will not admit, without great risk, of being held too fast; the late
Colonel Sykes, M.P., considered that if a crow-bar were driven in the
ground, and the cord were attached, it would prevent the men from being
rolled over occasionally, and his idea was put to the test.

I was surprised to observe from a distance, that the balloon had been
badly torn, and could not account for it until I returned and saw that
the neck valve had been pulled completely away. Had it been kept as I
left it, with a give and take movement to obviate a sudden snatch, the
balloon would have escaped injury.

It is really astonishing how the same ideas occur to all amateurs and
novices. Those who read much about aërostatics must have noticed that a
strong resemblance in these notions is constantly to be observed; they
one and all begin with the valve and have ever since I can remember.
Green’s and Coxwell’s notions are pronounced old-fashioned and exploded.

They all want to try india-rubber and other complicated springs
instead of the rat-trap principle, which is so very simple, and cannot
well fail to act in all weathers, whereas india-rubber will relax in
heat, and beadings and other additions will swell and contract in the
framework, if of wood, according to atmospheric changes; but the plan,
which experienced aëronauts know to be the safest, is almost sure to be
cast aside until an accident, as I have already pointed out, induces
beginners to fall back upon the approved plan.

Then again, the varnishes are wrong, Mr. A. or Mr. M. has a varnish
which is perfectly impermeable, the old stories and new pretensions
are reiterated, while the old stager knows very well that there are
objections to most of the new fancies, and that the colours and oils he
has used are like those of the old masters in painting, not so easily
to be surpassed, particularly in the present day, when most pigments
are so impure and adulterated.

Thirdly, the grapnels are all wrong, but if the ropes and balloon
equipments of early days were to be put side by side with many of the
accessories of modern appliances, I believe the balance would be in
favour of the experts of the last generation.

In 1796, the “Intrepide” was sent to the army of the Danube; a fifth
balloon was prepared for the army of Italy, but for some reason it was
never sent out.

In the year 1798, Napoleon took a balloon equipment to Egypt, but
unfortunately for the French, the English managed to capture the ship
which contained the apparatus.

After this, the aërostiers seem to have gradually died out of notice,
and the balloons were sold in 1804.

It was said that the dissolution of the corps was due more immediately
to the displeasure of Napoleon at the performance of a balloon which
ascended at his coronation, with a large crown suspended beneath it,
which travelled all the way to Rome, and deposited part of the crown on
the tomb of Nero.


MILITARY BALLOONING DURING THIS CENTURY.

After the Peace of Amiens was concluded in March 1802, military
aëronauts were less heard of, while professional and scientific air
explorers came more prominently into notice.

In 1812, the Russians constructed a huge balloon at Moscow, which was
to hover over the French army and rain forth shells and explosives, but
their expectations rose higher than their balloons, which refused to
move off the ground.

The French soldiers found this in the Castle of Voronzoff bearing many
thousand pounds of gunpowder, which were to have been launched upon
them.

General Count Philip de Segur says:--“This prodigious balloon was
constructed by command of Alexander, not far from Moscow, under the
direction of a German artificer.”

In 1815 a balloon reconnaissance was made at Antwerp, and in 1826 the
subject was again mooted by the French, and a balloon was sent to
Algiers, but it was never disembarked.

The Russians are said to have tried experiments at Sebastopol in 1854.

The French again used balloons in the Italian campaign of 1859; they
employed the civilian aëronaut Godard, and a useful ascent was made the
day before Solferino in a fire balloon.

When the Civil War in America broke out several balloons were used in
the operations. On October 4th, 1861, an aëronaut named La Montaine
ascended from McClellan’s camp on the Potomac; he was enabled to make
observation of their position and movements, and afterwards returned to
his own lines and communicated results which were declared to be of the
utmost importance.

Later on the Federals instituted a regular balloon corps, of which
Colonel Beaumont, R.E., wrote an interesting account in the Royal
Engineer Papers. The balloons were of two sizes, one of 13,000 cubic
feet capacity, the other double that size, but the large size was
found most suitable, a fact which our military balloonists should not
overlook in their desire to possess very light and small balloons for
easy transport.

The American balloons were made of the best silk, the upper part being
composed of three or four thicknesses; this was capable of retaining
sufficient gas for an ascent a fortnight after inflation, a statement
which can more readily be credited than the French accounts about
preserving it for _three months_.

Hydrogen was used for inflation, and generated in the old-fashioned way
with scrap iron and sulphuric acid.

In this chapter of facts and dates I have drawn freely on the
exhaustive work called “_Astra Castra_,” by Lieutenant Hatton Turnor,
formerly of the 60th Rifles; also from the indefatigable gleanings and
able lecture by Lieutenant Baden-Powell of the Scots Guards.

De Fonvielle’s “Adventures in the Air” have furnished valuable
information and incidents worth mentioning; Lieutenant Baden-Powell has
so cleverly compressed his matter that for the sake of brevity I am
induced at times to quote literally.

Two of the American balloons and two generators were taken each on a
four horsed waggon, with one two horsed acid cart.

Earthworks could be distinguished at a distance of five miles,
while the piquets and supports of the enemy were distinctly seen. A
telegraphic wire was sometimes attached to the balloon, so that the
aëronaut could at once communicate with the general, or even, as was
done one time, to the Government at Washington. Some photographs were
also taken of the enemy’s position.

The aëronaut and the general each had maps similarly divided into
small squares, which were numbered, whereby the communications were
simplified.

The “Times” correspondent said of the battle of Chickahominy: “During
the whole of the engagement, Professor Lowe’s balloon hovered over the
Federal lines at an altitude of 2,000 feet, and maintained successful
telegraphic communication with General McClellan’s head-quarters.”

In an attack on Mississippi Island, No. 10, Engineer Aëronaut Allan,
ascended and directed the artillery fire, communicating the effect of
each shot.

In July 1862, the first military balloon experiments in England took
place at Aldershot, and, as I had the honour of accomplishing them, I
will leave Lieut. Baden-Powell to allude to the events in his own words.

“The aëronaut, Mr. Coxwell, was employed to bring one of his balloons
which was filled at the gas-works, and made several captive ascents,
the highest being 2,200 feet. Colonel Beaumont said that no large
movement of troops could take place within a radius of ten miles
without being seen. Later on, more experiments were made, a one-inch
rope being used as cable.

“When the war between France and Germany broke out, Mr. Coxwell went to
manage some war balloons for the Germans. He formed two companies (two
officers and forty-two men) at Cologne, and his assistant went on to
Strasbourg, but that town capitulated before much service was rendered.”

During the siege of Paris, balloons, it will be remembered, were made
use of in a more regular and extensive manner, and with most important
results.

At first, two old balloons were anchored at Montmartre and Montsouris,
as observatories, to watch the Prussians. They apparently accomplished
but little, although one or two new ideas were introduced. The messages
from the balloons were put in a little box which was attached to the
cable by a ring, so that the observations were delivered straight to
those who held the rope.

Every twenty-four hours, six ascents were made, four by day, and two by
night, the latter to observe the camp fires, etc., and it was proposed
to use a search electric light.

When the Parisians found themselves cut off from all communication with
the outer world, balloons were naturally suggested as a means of escape.

Several experienced aëronauts were in Paris as well as a few balloons.

The first aëronaut, Duruof, left in a leaky machine, which owing to its
imperfect condition, was sent up like a projectile, as we are informed
by De Fonvielle. It described a parabola like that of a bombshell, and
by sacrificing seven hundredweight of ballast, the descent took place
nineteen miles from the Place St. Pierre, in the department of Eure,
not far from the Prussians, but still beyond their range.

The “Ville de Florence” took, by way of trial, the first pigeons
intended for return with despatches. Paris learned, with as much
satisfaction as if it had been a victory, the return of the first
aërial messenger.

Louis Godard had two small balloons, neither sufficient for the purpose
of escape, but he fixed one below the other, and made a very successful
voyage in the “Etats-Unis.”

The last ready made balloon was the “Céleste,” which was the first to
take post cards.

The Government then ordered a number of new balloons to be at once
constructed, they were turned out at the chief railway stations, which
for the time being were no longer used as such.

The balloons were made of strong cambric, oiled, and of about 70,000
cubic feet capacity; they were filled with coal gas, and could carry a
load of 2,000 pounds, including 600 pounds of ballast and 1,000 pounds
of despatches.

The first of these bore Gambetta, he was accompanied by his intimate
friend, M. Spuller. The political results of this voyage are well known.

One balloon travelled to Norway. Many were fired at, but few injured.
Three balloons fell into the hands of the enemy near Paris, and two in
Germany. Two were lost at sea, each manned by a sailor.

The average distance travelled, was about 180 miles, and the speed
varied from seven to fifty miles an hour, and in one instance, eighty
miles.

During four months, sixty-six balloons left Paris, of which fifty-four
were specially made by the administration of posts and telegraphs.

One hundred-and-sixty persons were carried over the Prussian lines.

Nine tons of despatches, or 3,000,000 letters were successfully
conveyed to their destinations. 360 pigeons were taken up, of which,
however, only fifty-seven returned to Paris, these conveyed, as Lieut.
Baden-Powell reminds us, 100,000 messages.

Wilfrid de Fonvielle gives us a vivid and thrilling account of how he
left Paris in a balloon.

The members of the scientific commission, he informs us, conceived the
idea of sending off balloons by night. He took his departure on the
20th of November; he was apprehensive, owing to the weather, of some
crushing catastrophe.

“The ‘Egalité’ began to show its graceful form and bright colours. The
sun was shining on the golden sphere, which the wind was gracefully
oscillating. I was looking on the clouds, which had a direction
inclining somewhere towards Prussian soil, when I heard people
shouting.

“A large hole had been made by the copper end of the pipe in the
graceful fabric. It was too late to think of mending it, and of
ascending afterwards before sunset.”

On the following morning the weather was horrid. After many delays,
owing to this cause, De Fonvielle and his companions started. They
saw desolated fields, disappearing one after another. He recognized
different parts where he had wandered during so many happy years. Twice
the Seine was crossed, that noble Seine! where German horses will never
drink! and he could see distinctly where his old balloon had been taken
by German hands.

He was looking at that spot when the first shot was heard, but the
balloon was more than 5,000 feet high. In less than two hours they
reached Louvain.

A few days after this successful journey, another nocturnal balloon
went up on a moonless night. A brave sailor, named Prince, was the sole
occupant of the car.

Next day, at dawn, some fishermen on the north coast of Scotland, saw a
globe disappear towards the west and sink in the ocean. A poor mother
and two sisters bewailed the loss of the unfortunate waif.

In June 1871, the English Government appointed a committee, consisting
of Colonel Beaumont, R.E., Lieut. Grover, R.E., and Sir F. Abel,
to enquire into the use of balloons for warfare, and as Lieut.
Baden-Powell, in his lecture at the Royal United Service Institution,
went into the dates and progress made in military ballooning, I shall
regard him as a reliable authority in these matters.

In April 1879, the English Government instituted an official balloon
committee, consisting of Colonel Noble, R.E., Sir F. Abel, and Captain
Lee, R.E., with whom was associated Captain Elsdale, R.E., and Captain
Templer, of the Middlesex Militia, the last mentioned having had
considerable experience in ballooning.

Experiments were conducted at Woolwich, and four balloons were made by
the Royal Engineers of specially woven fine _calico_, varnished.

A portable furnace and boiler for the manufacture of hydrogen gas was
devised similar in principle to the one used by the French in 1793,
_but the apparatus did not prove satisfactory_.

And who could expect that a mere imitation after the lapse of
eighty-six years, would do much good or credit to the British army.
Had a competent man been appointed consulting aëronaut, he would have
pointed out that the use of bricks, tiles, and red hot turnings,
was resorted to in France as a necessity when sulphur and sulphuric
acid were scarce, but as none of the above named officers had ever
ascended with me, or had my instructions, I could only note, with
regret, what appeared to be a useless expenditure of money and time,
and as to proper and suitable material. I had in my store rooms at
Seaford, Sussex, a large quantity of stout, pure silk, made expressly
for balloons, and could have turned out for Government, a typical war
balloon, which would have been creditable to our country, and been in
every way preferable to _calico_.

A few days after the first experiment, an unforeseen adventure happened
as one of the war balloons was being towed, attached to a cart.

The cable snapped and the balloon disappeared in the clouds!

In October, one of the balloons was tried free at a review on Woolwich
Common, but the wind was unfavourable.

The next year, the “Crusader” figured at the Brighton volunteer review,
successfully.

In September 1880, a whole company of Engineers (the 24th) went for
instruction in ballooning to Aldershot, and many experiments were made.

English military ballooning, as I have pointed out received a sudden
check when the “Saladin” was lost in the year 1881.

If we turn to the French, we read quite a different story. They
established, in 1872, another aëronautical school. An annual grant of
£10,000 was made, since then, the establishment has increased.

Their balloons are spherical, ten metres in diameter, made of the best
silk, and covered with a varnish which renders them so gas-tight, that
they can remain inflated for a month. So they assert.

Twenty out of forty balloons had already been made.

For captive ascents a kite screen is used. I suggested something of
this kind twenty-six years since, but I have now a more simple and
safer plan, with others for signalling etc., should they ever be
enquired after or wanted.


AIR TORPEDOES AND BOMBSHELLS.

If there is one branch of modern strategy which is likely to be watched
with keen interest during the next Continental war it will be that of
military ballooning. For some time we have heard of such wonderful
preparations in this line on the other side of the Channel that the
public, both at home and abroad, will be moved by anxious expectancy to
take note whether the steering gas bags and air torpedoes revolutionize
warfare by developing a more easy way of striking hostile forces,
namely, from a vertical position, in which they are so frequently
vulnerable. The aims of those who would merely employ balloons to
see what is going on behind the hills, and how their opponents are
disposed, seem insufficient to satisfy the ambition of foreign
engineers. A Frenchman has supplied the Russians with an air torpedo
that can be directed, so we are told, with the accuracy of a submarine
machine. It is to take up eight hundredweight of dynamite, which can be
discharged on the heads, and on the magazines and fortresses of their
foes, so as to make short work with them by blowing them up sky-high
without subjecting the attacking party to risk, owing to the remarkable
guiding power of their aërial cruiser, which is to strike and glide
away with marvellous rapidity, either as it emerges from the clouds, or
springs unseen above the smoke of battle, to let fall its destructive
cargo when least expected. All this sounds very terrific and smart in
theory, but the question is, can it be done with the tact and certainty
which we are asked to believe? From an aërostatic standpoint such
an enterprise would entirely depend upon aërial navigation having
been solved. Certain inventors avow, and perhaps imagine, that this
consummation has been settled already by those preliminary canters near
Paris of which we heard so much two years since. Now, it is not for
me, or any other practical man, to say that the pretensions put forth
for “the conquest of the air” are visionary; but this I do say, that
the alleged movements of the cigar-shaped balloons have not warranted
us in concluding that the art of steering and propelling has been
satisfactorily mastered. Had it been otherwise, how is it that so
magnificent an achievement has not been forthwith applied to the more
noble and remunerative arts of peace and commerce, instead of being
shelved for the horrors of war? The moment air ships can be directed,
the probability is they will be seized upon immediately to bring
about results far more creditable than the annihilation of our fellow
creatures.

Secondly. A bombardment from above might, and possibly would, involve
a contest in the air. If these agents are available for attack they
may be constructed for defensive objects, for retaliation, and for
reprisals. One may swoop down like a hawk, but another may rise up like
a rocket and bring down its adversary like the stick. And how about
the latest arms of precision, chain-shot, and shrapnel? A gas-inflated
observatory can often be kept well in the rear in a more secure captive
state, but if these flying torpedoes are going in for close quarters,
as they must to “spot” their victims, the hazards will be so great that
pressed men, rather than volunteers, will have to be forced into the
empyrean; and, so far as my experience goes among officers, soldiers,
and civilians, I never yet noticed any exuberant bellicose tendency, or
display of pugnacity, while exploring in mid-air.

I once took up a gentleman who was said to be very daring, and among
his accomplishments was a proficiency with the gloves; a friend of
his who was with us thought fit in a moment of pardonable elation to
indulge in playful sparring with the reputed amateur boxer. I was
rather surprised to notice that he evinced an apparent distaste, and
even incompetency, for this sort of thing when aloft. It certainly
might have been that the narrow confines of a wicker basket were not
sufficiently capacious for manœuvring, or that a passing nervousness
took all the fight out of him. He protested against his friend’s
familiarity, while casting an appealing glance at me. “Recollect,” he
cried, “where we are;” but on reaching _terra firma_ I observed that
his facial expression was decidedly more combative, and that he was
quite ready then for a friendly exchange of taps; this, with other
incidents I could mention, has led me to conclude that the upper air is
not altogether suitable or provocative for belligerent performances.

By way of illustration, I may state that Green more than forty years
since was engaged to attend with one of his balloons at a park down in
Staffordshire, where there was to be an experiment with dropping shells
from a battery affixed to the hoop, but no one was to go up, and the
aëronaut’s services were only required for the preparatory work, as the
long range committee preferred to manage matters themselves, so far
as the adjustment and discharge of the petards went. They selected a
central spot in a wood as the area for their intended demolishment,
but on setting the balloon free they neglected Green’s hint to look
out for a veering current, in case they had not provided a remedy, as
he had, if his services had been retained for the most critical part
of the undertaking. Well, the experimentalists disregarded the expert,
but when the missiles were discharged they flew bang at friendly
spectators instead of the camping ground of an ideal enemy, thus
causing a helter-skelter stampede, including a bevy of policemen--in
short, the whole affair was a fiasco; and it might have been so easily
prevented, as Green’s foresight had led him to think of a compensating
plan to cause the balloon to go straight in the desired course; but
the enthusiasts did not believe that a past master was necessary for
aëronautic transactions, and it will not be surprising if some of the
military adventurers to whom we have been referring find themselves
similarly situated.

Last year I read that two intrepid Frenchmen made a trip to our
shores from Cherbourg, and threw down as they passed some yachts near
the coast a number of cork balls painted white, just, sportively of
course, to see how they would act as the lightest and most harmless of
grenades, without, as we may charitably conclude, any ulterior designs
such as the First Napoleon is credited with when the aërial flotilla
at Boulogne was talked about. But, really, in the present day, when
the blowing up of ironclads is a recognized feature of warfare, and
when torpedo boats can dive and make straightway at a man-of-war to
strike below the belt, it is time to be on the _qui vive_, and though
aëronauts may feel no great alarm about an unexpected visit from a
torpedo fleet, knowing, as they do, that the air is more than eight
hundred times lighter than water, and that the difficulties to be
first surmounted are proportionately great, still, there is no denying
that the route overhead is open to all nations, and that a scare, lest
any unwelcome guests should arrive, has actually been felt as to the
possibility of their turning up from beneath the Channel. We know that
John Bull and all true Britons would rather face an adversary from
above, than if he were to crawl and pounce upon us from below.

But at present we need not quake as to the high or subway route.


MILITARY BALLOONING IN THE YEAR OF JUBILEE.

One of the latest and most interesting phases of this subject relates
to Lord Wolseley’s maiden ascent from the grounds at Lidsing, near
Chatham, and to various active preparations on the Continent which
have a character of their own, and are essentially dissimilar to the
experiments in Great Britain.

An illustrious man undergoing his initiation in the balloon car, forms
an event which is not of every day occurrence, and must prove very
encouraging to the intrepid engineer officers, and also to the general
public, who like to see the leading authority go now and again to the
front for the sake of thoroughly inspecting, and of obtaining some
practical acquaintance with any new branch of science which may be on
trial.

The General’s declaration that “he believed _himself_ in novelties,”
must have produced conflicting opinions in the minds of many more
conservative brother officers; but what must have been the effect of
the next assertion? namely, “the more novelties the better.”

Lord Wolseley believed in what Napoleon said: “You must change your
tactics frequently.”

The first impression made by his ascent of 500 feet, elicited the
General’s approval.

In the course of a conversation with one of his staff, Lord Wolseley
stated that “had he been able to employ balloons in the earlier stages
of the Soudan campaign, the affair would not have lasted as many months
as it did years.”

We get therefore a very high testimony as to the value of the balloon
for military objects, and as the exploits of our war balloons do not
amount, at present, to anything particularly noteworthy, the General’s
encouraging remarks will have an excellent effect, it may fairly be
presumed.

The most recent effort in this line, near Dover, was not successful.

The balloon “Sentinel” was filled and essayed to watch the volunteers,
but was forced to retire with the most eccentric capers--owing to the
freaks of rude Boreas, which was, after all, merely imparting useful
instruction, though not particularly pleasing, probably, to the officer
who occupied the seat of honour.

It is, doubtless, a matter to rejoice over, that he was not blown out
over the adjacent coast line; had he been driven away down Channel in
a small skin balloon under the influence of a north-easterly wind, he
might have touched the extreme corner of the French coast, or been sent
down betwixt the Channel Islands.

Happily, however, there was no fresh fatality to lament over, and
the instructions imparted by the clerk of the weather as to the
impracticability of captive ascents during strong winds will not be
lost, and may prove of the greatest importance, so that it is well
worth while referring to it as a warning for future caution.

As the writer of this book holds it to be his province, and his duty as
a practical man to review both sides of public opinion respecting his
speciality, he considers it right to state, that the representatives
of the press, like the representatives of our constituencies in
parliament, do not all take one and the same view about military
ballooning; neither do superior officers or the rank-and-file, who, in
these advanced days are quite capable of drawing their own conclusions.

A paragraph which I read in the Court Society Review, was to this
effect.

“I have very little faith in military balloons for the purposes of
observation. In the Soudan no atmospheric conditions, and many were
tried, were found to be suitable, for even when the air was dead-still,
and brilliantly clear, the balloon waggled to such an extent as to
make telescopic observation impossible, or, at any rate, practically
useless. At the Easter Monday fight, an infinitely more futile attempt
was made to employ the balloon in a stiffish breeze, and the result
was, of course, as worthless as the experiment was dangerous.

“All the same, for signalling, especially at night, captive balloons
might be made of immense use.”

Secondly, we have another rather discouraging experience, which ought
not to be forgotten or omitted in these pages.

It is in McClellan’s own story, about their doings on April 11th, 1862,
and is rather amusing than complimentary to the cause I have so long
advocated.

“I am just recovering,” the writer observes, “from a terrible scare.
Early this morning I was awakened by a despatch from Fitz-John’s
head-quarters, stating that Fitz had made an ascension in the balloon
this morning, and that it had broken away and come to the ground some
three miles south-west, which would be within the enemy’s lines.

“You can imagine how I felt. I at once sent off to the various pickets
to find out what they knew, and tried to do something to save him,
but the order had no sooner gone, than in walks Fitz, just as cool
as usual. He had luckily come down near my own camp, after actually
passing over that of the enemy.

“You may rest assured of one thing,” was the remark: “you won’t catch
me in the confounded balloon, nor will I allow any other General in it.”

On the converse side, it should be mentioned that in a telegram
received at Washington during the Civil War, it was stated, “that all
the information received from _balloons_, deserters, prisoners, &c.,
agrees in the statement that the mass of the rebel troops were still in
the immediate vicinity of Richmond, ready to defend it.”

As a pioneer myself in the service of military ballooning, I heartily
wish that something more had been carried out in the decidedly
important neighbourhood of Suakim.

I was constantly suggesting plans; among others, to take out an
apparatus and holder for the generation of coal gas, feeling persuaded
that at a short notice, an enterprising private firm would have sent
out an equipment with the necessary men and coals, to generate gas on
the old quick and cheap plan, in addition to the compressed hydrogen
system. There are, certainly, some advantages in employing the lighter
gas, but several counter and compensating results might be adduced
on the other side, one of which is, that in a hot climate, pure
hydrogen will escape quicker than the denser production, and, I have
no hesitation in saying, that a small skin balloon behaves itself in
a breeze with an infinitely less steady action, than a more enlarged
surface with greater vertical power imparted to it, which is one out
of many of those secrets of success, which men of long experience are
well aware of, and I do believe that a certain amount of co-operation
between civilian experts, and the military engineers would be attended
with good results.

I am not referring particularly to the English school of balloonists,
but to foreign corps as well.

It is a regrettable fact that one cannot perceive in the whole list of
balloon transactions in warfare, either at home or abroad, any deeds
that are at present conspicuously worth chronicling. The splendid
exodus of hastily organised balloonists, chiefly sailors, who went out
of Paris during the Franco-German War, can scarcely be called military
ballooning.

There was no strategy, exceptional skill, or discoveries to mark and
dignify their departure or descent; only a most valuable and timely
postal and parcels delivery transmission.

This was excellent auxiliary aid, and altogether _sui generis_, but it
was not manœuvring with the enemy or rendering fresh intelligence which
could not be gained by ordinary scouts, I mean in a strictly military
sense. The winged messengers (pigeons) were certainly helped in their
work by having a lift up on their outward journey; but what we should
like to hear of, when balloons show up in war time, is that something
important has been seen and reported which would have escaped notice
but for the argus-eyed aëronauts.

A considerable amount of bewilderment, as we have said, accompanies a
novice’s first glance of the earth’s surface, when villages, fields,
towns and fortresses, are seen under a new aspect, with minimised
proportions reduced to the model size, and seen from above instead of
horizontally.

It requires a trained observer to make heads, tails, and relative
proportions out of the new map, and if any altitude has to be attained,
very small machines will not do, they may be light and of little
capacity, but they are unable to offer a powerful upward tug, which is
indispensable for steadying the balloon when telescopic observations
have to be made.

The action of diminutive machines of this kind may not inaptly be
compared to the jerking, fitful movement, of certain small birds, such
as a tomtit, or a titlark, as contrasted with the soaring power of an
eagle, or the steadied poise of a hawk.

The balloon, under which Lord Wolseley took a bird’s-eye view,
is described as “a magnificent spic and span new aërial machine,
constructed of the new preparation of _bullock’s skin_, and capable
of containing 10,000 feet of compressed gas,” by which is meant, I
presume, 10,000 feet of hydrogen gas that has been compressed and
subsequently liberated into the said balloon.

If I were questioned as to the value of this kind of material for the
objects intended by the designers, I should, certainly, not speak
disparagingly of it, because I think that skin may be very good in
its way, but I believe that a certain quality of silk, all things
considered, is more reliable, and if it is heavier than skin, it is
more readily repaired in case of fracture, and would better resist the
shrivelling effects of a hot atmosphere, and of sudden gusts of wind.
Silk is also less tempting to the gnawing of insects.

If it is supposed that the use of skin is a new adaptation, I can
remove any false impression of that sort by stating that half a century
since, I saw and handled a huge balloon composed of similar animal
substance, which was called Egg’s folly. The gunmaker had built an
enormous fish shaped affair, and it had, fish like, an air bladder to
assist it in rising and descending. I was asked to buy the lot which
had been laid by for some years, but it was not to my taste; later
on, however, after Mr. Barnum had brought over the dwarf, Tom Thumb,
to this country, an exhibition was got up at the Surrey Zoological
Gardens, and Mr. C. Green was asked to provide a suitable balloon to
take up Tom Thumb for a captive ascent.

The air bladder then cropped up, as it would lift fifty or sixty pounds
when filled with ordinary gas, and I well remember witnessing the
ascent, and shaking hands with the occupant of the little car.

I was informed afterwards by the veteran himself, that Captain Currie,
who was a frequent voyager at that time, wished to train and lose
weight, so that the skin balloon would take him up, if filled with
hydrogen instead of coal gas.

I do not think the trial came off, but I can vouch for it, that the
so-called bullock’s skin is by no means a novel departure.

We thus learn that history repeats itself, even in an art which is
practically little more than a century old.

If we turn from the balloon force at home, and direct a glance towards
the continent, as much difference is to be observed in their aërostatic
pretensions, as there is between our small and compact army, when
compared with the millions of bayonets (and good ones no doubt) that
are ready to do battle whenever the dogs of war shall be let loose for
slaughter.

In England, preference is shown for exceedingly small bullock’s skin
balloons.

In France they are cigar or cannon shaped, with steering power and
propelling machinery attached. I am referring, now, to the war balloons
at Meudon.

Germany inclines to medium sized spherical balloons, composed of silk
by preference--and I think they are right--to the calico or muslin
balloons in store at Chatham or Lidsing.

Russia, if we may believe newspaper accounts, is provided with an air
torpedo, besides Montgolfier, and gas balloons. The torpedo air ship
can take up eight hundredweight of dynamite, the application of which I
have already pictured.

An American novelty consists of an electro dynamic air ship, in the
form of a cigar cut lengthways, which presents a flat underside, and a
rounded upper; it is constructed of seven independent cells, which are
divided longitudinally, making fourteen separate compartments in all.

Among the attractions proposed for the Paris exhibition of 1889, is a
captive balloon, having a capacity of 1,800,000 cubic feet, which will
take up one hundred passengers.

Then comes the most wonderful invention of all, a balloon which is to
surpass in speed the Flying Scotchman. The German Government is stated
to have purchased this monster for a million marks, and the constructor
is to have a handsome pension for life. I do not believe it!

Now, if these formidable rivals are bent on mischief, and find an
opportunity of indulging their destructive propensities, there will be
lively and sensational diversions overhead, no less than frightful work
beneath, particularly if the torpedoes act their part as expected.

Many scientific men, and all the professional aëronauts, with whom I
am acquainted, regard this tall talk, not altogether in a literal and
serious light, but as a scare and exchange of swagger between those
powers who desire to be thought most efficient in modern appliances
for warfare. Be that as it may, there can be no doubt that vast sums
of money have been expended, and extensive preparations made, in
aërostatic material.

There is something about all this boasting and threatening which is
calculated to disturb the serenity of susceptible persons, when they
read of hundreds of pounds of dynamite and chemical compounds being
cast down upon contending armies, and about forts blown up, especially
when it is remembered that no shields or ramparts are ever raised, or
dreamt of, to resist a vertical onslaught from the regions above. This
mode of attack would, to all intents and purposes, prove a novelty, and
the question is, whether the lieutenants of our far seeing general,
who approves of new tactics, are prepared to resist this kind of thing
should a detachment of air torpedoes swarm like wasps or locusts upon
our numerically small army, or should they even seek out our tiny war
balloons and demolish them with a fell swoop of explosives.

The bare idea of such an ignominious extinction brings us to the vital
question of how such intruders could be sent to the right about, or
brought low by arms of precision.

Lieutenant B. Baden-Powell, in his able lecture at the Royal United
Service Institution, took the danger into consideration; not I think
under any apprehension about the descent of dynamite shells, but simply
of the customary missiles which are discharged from cannon and small
arms. We may infer that air torpedoes and such like were not dreaded.

Mr. Baden-Powell starts from an apt and thrilling commencement when he
says--

“First then, the chance of being wrecked by shots from the enemy.

“It must be remembered,” he goes on to say, “that the balloon would
generally be some way behind the first line, and that the enemy would
hardly, especially during the heat of battle, pay much attention to it.
It is well to remember that if only hit by a few bullets it would not
be much damaged, and could be quickly repaired. Both at Frankfort and
at Frankenthal the balloons were penetrated by bullets, at the latter
place by nine, but the balloon remained up three-quarters of an hour
after. In some experiments made at Tours, a balloon was penetrated by
bullets at 1,000 yards, but the escape of gas was very slow, and the
balloon remained up some time longer.

“_Secondly_--and now comes a case in point which should not be lightly
passed over, it is this--

“In 1880 the Siege Operations’ Committee made an experiment at
Dungeness with rather more disastrous results for the balloon. An
eight-inch howitzer was directed on a captive balloon 2,000 yards off,
and 800 feet high. The first shot was unsuccessful, the exact range
not being known. The second shell, however, burst just in front of the
balloon and tore it open. But even then it took fifteen minutes to
descend, so that the aëronauts would have been safe.” Later tests have
also taken place.

Many persons would think, and as many more might argue with some show
of common sense on their side, that the actual safety of a party of
balloonists after their machine had been torn open by a shell from an
eight-inch howitzer was perilous in the extreme; but the lecturer had
no such fears probably, as he went on with unmoved visage, I daresay,
to remark that “bullets made of spongy platinum had been suggested as a
means of igniting the hydrogen in a balloon by mere contact.”

But these stirring and well nigh nerve-testing quotations need not be
dwelt upon to any further extent, they suffice to show that the risks,
without taking into consideration the doings of those horrid torpedoes,
have been fairly weighed.

If the dynamiters put in an appearance, and manage by skilful steering
to be in at close quarters, then all I have to say is Heaven help those
who may be in their power.

While contemplating this all important phase of aërostatics, I
sometimes wonder whether these and other equally important ideas have
ever entered into the fertile brains of those, whose province it is
to lead and direct the military balloon tactics. There are, I have no
hesitation in saying, at this critical period of our national history,
uses for balloons even in this country, considering its position
and possible surroundings, which I could point out if they would be
listened to, and which at no distant period may be found unprovided for
when most needed.

I recollect when first I talked over with Major Grover, R.E., who went
up with me, my plan for using small and large balloons for destructive
purposes, I had such a friendly but scathing glance that I at once
interpreted his meaning to the effect that “anything of that sort would
not be countenanced at head-quarters.”

Well, I have lived to draw attention to the very suggestions which were
lightly esteemed a quarter of a century since, but I will not allude to
any fresh conceptions at the present time.

Sir Edward Birkbeck, M.P., has done useful service in narrating not
long since his experiences with me in the year 1862. Observations for
military purposes were gone into, and our ascent made in the presence
of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales and the Duke of Sutherland
was narrated with spirit. Instructive comments followed, and war
balloons were referred to which have since been spoken of in a pleasing
letter, wherein Sir Edward gave evidence that he still has a taste for
scientific ballooning.

[Illustration]




REMARKABLE ASCENTS DURING THIS CENTURY.


At no time during my own recollection, has an attempt, to reach a great
height, been heralded with greater stir and interest than the voyage by
Messrs. Jovis and Mallet from Paris, on August 13th, 1887.

In England, scientific men, professional aëronauts, and the public,
regarded it with favour and admiration, that is, so far as their
spirited intentions were interpreted on this side of the channel; and
I may take upon myself to say, that it was viewed with no envious
feelings, it being clear, that two enterprising men were desirous of
trying their hands at adding lustre to the annals of aëronautics, and,
that like a great many travellers in new and untried latitudes, these
courageous aëronauts would do their best for their employers, and their
own credit, or perish in the struggle, which last they were not wholly
unprepared for, having disposed of their bodies in case of a fatal
issue.

Of course, the press as a faithful mirror of public opinion, was not
entirely in accord with their aims, about which some wrote severely
and disparagingly, as it seemed to them, that the most apparent motive
for the ascent, was to settle at what height animal life could exist;
and other reviewers went so far as to insinuate, that pigeons and
guinea-pigs were all very well, but in reality, it was a thinly veiled
international bit of rivalry, as to who should go highest, Frenchmen or
Englishmen.

Well, even if there existed a limited amount of this sort of thing, it
was only friendly rivalry, which no true Briton could possibly object
to, or be afraid of; it was not, however, to be expected that in France
or England another expedition, which might be ill-fated like Sivel’s
and Crose Spenelli’s, would be recognized without protest and free
writing. Still, on the whole, Captain Jovis and Lieut. Mallet were well
received, and I have little hesitation in saying that if an aëronaut,
in this country, had on his own account or on that of a newspaper
proprietor, done the like, he would have been, in all probability,
denounced for his pains, as such an undertaking would not do here,
unless a scientific society, or some pre-eminent physicist were to
embark in totally fresh experiments.

As an instance of this very natural spirit of emulation, which is to be
met with among enthusiastic air travellers, I may mention, that after
I had initiated the late lamented Mr. Walter Powell, M.P., by taking
him a long trip from Ashford, in Kent, to Crediton, in Devonshire, he
wished, among other chivalrous schemes, not only to go straight to Rome
without let or hindrance, which was most plucky and ambitious, but
he wanted, without being duly acclimatised, to go seven miles high.
I took upon myself to discountenance this and other suggestions, and
was most likely considered a slow old coach for my pains, but I rather
prided myself upon being properly cautious, and as I considered my
patron’s views rather too advanced for me at my time of life, I gladly
allowed that gentleman to pass into other hands, and what occurred
afterwards is a matter not easily forgotten.

In Messrs. Jovis and Mallet’s ascent, there was a conspicuous omission
in the first place, in not giving the size of their balloon. This was
neglectful and ominous, as it is by figures and facts, that a fair and
proper estimate can be formed as to the competency of the aëronaut and
his balloon to do the work he takes in hand.

M. Wilfrid de Fonvielle, by correct calculations, found it too small
for the intended elevation.

Whether aëronauts of the highest rank, such as the Tissandiers, Camille
Flammarion, and de Fonvielle, were too polite and forbearing, as to
impossibilities, I am not aware. The latter authority is known to be
free from all party prejudices, to have an opinion of his own, and to
utter it when necessary.

De Fonvielle may well have had doubts, I remember that Green had, as
to the heights attained by Robertson and Gay-Lussac, the former being
credited with having risen over 7,000 metres, while the latter reached
23,000 feet--higher, be it observed, than the 22,960 feet reached by
Jovis.

Green never could make out, to use his own words, “how it was that
they did it with balloons, as small as were quoted in the accounts of
Robertson’s and Gay-Lussac’s experiments.”

“Certainly,” as the veteran observed, “they used hydrogen, but there
must have been very little left of it on returning to the earth, if the
diameters of their small balloons were no more than stated,” that is as
Green added with emphasis, “if they touched 22,000 or 23,000 feet.”

By the light of our present investigations and deductions, it appears
that many of the accounts of the early ascents in this century, viz.,
in 1803 and 4, are unreliable statements, and not altogether excusable.

For instance, Robertson, in his journey from Hamburg, said that “his
head swelled, and that blood came from his nose.”

M. L’Hoest, his companion, was violently affected in a similar way; he
could not get his hat on.

Mr. Glaisher’s head and mine were covered with caps, but I did not
notice any cerebral expansion, being very intent upon the expansion of
the gas; in short, we were always sticking to more important business.

“At their greatest elevation they could scarcely hear each other speak.”

Now I found at seven miles high, and at five and six, that in the
absence of all sounds it was not necessary to speak much above a
whisper, and that palpitations, watch-ticks, &c., were audible with an
increase of sound the higher I got.

Robertson and his friend “could scarcely resist a strong inclination to
sleep.”

I not only knew the great importance of keeping _wide awake_, but felt
no desire to do otherwise.

Robertson’s balloon contained only 9,000 cubic feet of hydrogen.

It weighed, with all its apparatus, 5 pood 2 pounds, or a little over
200 pounds, and the weight of the whole was 18 pood 3 pounds.

Now, unless these figures are incorrect, a man like Charles Green might
well feel doubtful.

M. Gay-Lussac on September 15th, 1804, when he attained 7016 metres,
though well clothed, began to feel cold, he was still “far from
experiencing such uneasiness as to oblige him to descend,” his pulse
and respiration were accelerated; these were all the inconveniences
he felt, and they read to my thinking more correct and natural than
Robertson’s.

Green had no belief in what may be styled miraculous ballooning, by
that I mean in going up very high or extremely far in a very diminutive
balloon.

Practically speaking, irrespective of exact mathematical
determinations, a sure and certain test is the amount of ballast taken,
together with the volume of gas in the balloon at starting, and the
space left for expansion, supposing that the ascent is made with only a
partial inflation.

It is useless to boast of distance or height, unless sand equal to the
occasion can be taken in the car; and if the diameter and depth of the
machine is not in conformity with well established rules, no confidence
should be placed in unsupported vapourings, as all the accessories to
which I refer must be in order and bear comparison, one with another.

In a voyage this year by German officers from Berlin, the exact number
of bags of ballast they took up led me to guess the capacity of the
balloon, allowing for the number of passengers, and the supposed weight
of the whole; I found that I was pretty near the mark, and that the
expenditure of sand was about in proportion to my own when I took Mr.
Walter Powell a journey of 250 miles.

The balloon itself is no bad indicator of what can be achieved,
especially in vertical motion, that is by showing the extent of
expansion when the silk is throughout fully distended, and if it be
so, by the force with which the gas rushes out of the safety valve; it
in this way helps and checks barometrical readings, and may at times
approximately take the place of that instrument for a rough-and-ready
intimation of the height. For example, if a balloon mounts up when only
half full at starting, and afterwards rises so high that gas escapes
from the neck, then it must be between three and four miles high,
roughly speaking.

It is of no use for a novice or an unscientific aëronaut to tell a
fanciful tale about his lofty flights to fabulous elevations, when he
is known to have taken only a moderate amount of ballast, and only one
person besides himself in the car.

If one hears a story that a small aërial affair has been up miles high,
or hundreds of miles horizontally, even at a low altitude, do not take
it for granted that you have been told the truth, you can easily try
and prove it for yourself. Just ask a few questions as to its size,
next get at its displacement of air, as you would judge in like manner
of a ship’s displacement of water when it has to carry so many thousand
tons of cargo.

If you hear that a balloon of thirty or even forty feet in diameter has
been 20,000 feet high when filled with coal gas, shake your head and
fly to figures, remembering that the following simple calculations will
enable you to judge for yourself. Make, in fact, yourself a balloon of
tissue or Chinese paper, and bear in mind at the outset the proportion
that the _diameter_ bears to the circumference of a circle.

Say you make it of three feet diameter, or thirty-six inches.

In order to find the circumference, which is three times and
one-seventh the diameter, multiply the diameter thirty-six by 3·1416--

  Then 3·1416
           36 inches.
       ------
       188496
       94248
     --------
     113·0976
     ========

  _Secondly._--By multiplying this circumference 113, by the diameter
  36, it gives the superficial surface.

                                                113
                                                 36
                                               ----
                                                678
                                               339
                                               ----
  Number of superficial inches on the surface  4068
                                               ====

This multiplied by one-sixth gives the contents in cubic inches--

    4068
       6
  ------
   24408
  ======

Then if 24408, the contents of a balloon three feet in diameter is
divided by 1728, the number of cubic inches in a foot, you have
fourteen cubic feet as the capacity of a three feet balloon, thus--

  1728) 24408 (14 cubic feet
        1728
         ----
         7128     and
         6912
         ----
          216 inches over.
         ====

If you want to find the internal capacity of a balloon three feet in
diameter, first multiply the three feet by three feet to give the
circumference (nine feet), which gives twenty-seven, the surface.

Then multiply by 5236 to ascertain the cubic contents.

      5236
        27
    ------
     36652
    10472
  --------
   14·1372 being 14 cubic feet and a fraction.
  ========
   14

I will just give one more simple calculation of the capacity and
superficial surface of a balloon thirty-three--instead of three--feet
in diameter.

         33
         33
       ----
         99
        99
       ----
       1089 circumference.
         33 diameter.
     ------
      35937 surface.
      ·5236 decimal numbers.
     ------
     215622
    107811
    71874
  179685
  ----------
  18816·6132 cubic contents.
  ==========

Carburetted hydrogen or coal gas, should raise from 402 pounds, as
1,000 feet of light gas should raise 40 pounds to the 1,000 cubic feet.

If the reader is desirous of calculating either for model balloons,
or, as to the size, capacity, and power of larger balloons, take note
of this concise and abridged table of the diameters, surfaces, and
capacities, together with the ascensive power for every foot capacity
for hydrogen, so that if coal gas is used, allowance must be made
accordingly.

First, for miniature paper or skin balloons.

  Feet, Diameter.   Surface         Capacities           Pounds
                   in Square.     in Cubic Feet.    Ascensive Power.
        1               3-1/10           0-1/2              0-2/32
        3              28               14                  1 {in nearly
                                                              {a pound.
        6             113              113                  7
       10             314              523                 33
       20           1,257            4,189                261

LARGER BALLOONS.

       30           2,827           14,137                884
       40           5,026           33,510              2,094
       50           7,854           65,450              4,091
       80          20,106          268,083             16,755
      100          31,416          523,599             32,725

The striking advantage of enlarging balloons, arises from the fact,
that their powers increase faster than their surfaces. When the
diameter is doubled, four times as much material is required, but you
get eight times as much capacity.

I have now offered a few plain calculations in order to assist those
who feel interested in the subject, they may be extended and more
scientifically pursued in another volume of my experiences, when they
will be required, perhaps, for illustration of other ascents.

I am often asked, how high will a balloon go? Will it mount higher and
higher until gas is let off to stop it?

My answer is, that when a balloon, after inflation, is brought to
an even balance, in other words, when so much ballast is placed in
the car, that it shows a very slight tendency to move upwards, then
the required ascending power is increased by putting out more sand,
say to the amount of twenty, thirty, or forty pounds, according
to circumstances, I mean the strength of wind at the time, and the
proximity of adjacent objects, such as trees and buildings.

With either of these limited number of weights removed, the balloon
cannot rise very high, unless there is either a large space for
expansion, or a very much larger quantity of sand is put out
subsequently.

I will simply try this position by asking the reader to suppose that
A and B, two rival aëronauts, are about to engage at one and the same
time with two balloons of similar capacities to reach an elevation, say
of six miles, and that both balloonists have balloons that will contain
each 100,000 cubic feet of coal gas, and that they each take up one
person, so that the weight of their respective balloons, each having to
raise two persons, will altogether be 1,000 pounds for A’s and the same
for B’s machine.

A’s balloon is to be quite filled with gas that lifts forty pounds the
1,000 feet, but B’s balloon is to be only half filled.

On testing the lifting power, A’s being full, that is containing
100,000 cubic feet of gas, will, after deducting the weight of balloon
and two persons calculated at 1,000 pounds, with 3,000 pounds weight of
ballast.

But B’s balloon would only have a 1,000 pounds of sand as compared with
A’s, because B’s is only half full, having only 50,000 feet of gas in
it.

Well, under these apparently opposite conditions, which balloon, do you
suppose, would attain the greatest height?

I should say, paradoxical as it may appear, that they would reach
about the same height, because the space left for expansion in B’s
balloon, owing to its half filled state, would admit of the gas
doubling its volume, while A’s balloon, being filled at starting,
would from the first irrecoverably lose gas from the neck, although it
remained full to the safety valve.

B’s would hold its own 50,000 feet, and it would quickly increase and
multiply up to 100,000 cubic feet, and thus equal A’s balloon.

The store of ballast would soon be equal. A’s 3,000 pounds would, at
three and three quarter miles high, be reduced to the level of B’s,
which was 1,000 pounds at starting, with only 50,000 cubic feet of gas.

I have frequently adopted this system, but as I shall advert in the
next part of my experiences to cases in point, I prefer now to refer
to two of Mr. Green’s high ascents in proof of the practicability and
objects of this method, which saves labour in casting out so much sand,
and saves expense as well.

The two voyages of Green, which were made in the years 1838-9, have
altogether escaped notice in the recent reviews of the most remarkable
scientific ascents in the present century.

Robertson’s, Gay-Lussac’s, Bixio’s, and Barral’s having been mentioned,
but not those of Green, which came after the ascents of above
experimenters, and long before the fatal one by Croce Spinelli and
Sivel, and that lately made by Captain Jovis and Lieutenant Mallet.

On the 4th of September, 1838, the celebrated Nassau balloon, which at
that time was the property of Messrs. Gye & Hughes, the proprietors
of Vauxhall Gardens, ascended from them with Mr. Green, Mr. Edward
Spencer, and Mr. Rush of Elsenham Hall, Essex, the latter gentleman
having engaged the balloon for experimental purposes, and more
particularly on this occasion for ascertaining the greatest altitude
that could with safety be attained with three persons in the car; and
further to ascertain the changes of temperature that would take place
at different elevations, as well as the variations of the currents
of air; and finally, to establish the important fact, as to whether
the same difficulties with regard to respiration in a very rarified
atmosphere would be experienced by persons rising in a balloon to any
great altitude, as have been felt by persons who have ascended lofty
mountains, and by previous aërial travellers in balloons to great
heights.

They left the earth at twenty-five minutes before 7 p.m. with two
barometers standing at thirty inches each.

One of these instruments, as well as a thermometer, was furnished
by Mr. Rush, constructed on the most accurate principles, and made
expressly for the purpose.

The thermometer stood at 66° Fahrenheit.

The following were the variations:--

                    Barometer.      Thermometer.
                    30 inches.      66 degrees.
                    23    ”         56    ”
                    21    ”         53    ”
                    19    ”         46    ”
                    18    ”         42    ”
                    17    ”         39    ”
                    16    ”         35    ”
                    15    ”         25    ”
  Greatest altitude 14·70 ”         25    ”


On first rising they took a north-westerly direction; at 2,500 it
changed to the north, and shortly afterwards to north-east.

Their journey was pursued towards Epping, and they were discharging
ballast all the time. Leaving Dunmow to their left they attained their
greatest altitude, namely, 19,335 feet, or three and a half miles and
855 feet.

In consequence of the great quantity of sand discharged after clearing
the Metropolis their ascent became very rapid, and, from the great
expansion of the inflating power, the gas rushed out from the lower
valve in considerable torrents.

The velocity of their upward progress caused the balloon to rotate in a
spiral motion with astonishing rapidity.

During their trip about 1,200 pounds of ballast was discharged, but
they reserved 100 pounds by which to regulate the descent.

During their descent, when at 1,200 feet from the earth, a heavy
fall of snow was encountered, accompanied by a sudden and very great
reduction of temperature, the thermometer dropping to 22°, or 10° below
freezing point. The mercury in the barometer at this moment had risen
to nineteen inches.

I mention this circumstance for the purpose of showing that sometimes
sudden changes of temperature have been experienced, not only by Green,
but by Bixio and Barral later on in the present century.

The fatigue of the muscular powers, occasioned by exertion in emptying
ballast, did not occasion any serious inconvenience in respect to
difficulty in respiration.

We shall see, in the next ascent which was still higher, that the
plan I have already exemplified as to allowing considerable space for
expansion was resorted to, and this saved both the necessity for and
the depression consequent upon hard work, although a large volume of
gas was literally wasted, which might, in an economical point of view,
have been prevented; but it will serve to show that a large balloon
partially inflated, with a reduced amount of sand, is for all practical
and scientific purposes preferable to a fully inflated balloon, that
is, for very high ascents.

The ordinary way of examining the specific gravity of the different
gases is by a simple method founded on the principles of pneumatics,
for discovering the relative specific gravities of the aëriform fluids.

This consists in observing the time that a given portion of the gas,
under a determined pressure, takes to escape through a very small
aperture. The density of the gaseous fluid must be inversely as the
square of the interval that elapses.

The weight of the balloon and all appendages must evidently compress
the included gas, and thereby render it in some degree denser.

To compute this minute effect, we have only to consider that the
pressure of a column of atmosphere at the mean temperature, and near
the level of the sea, is 1632 pounds on a circle of a foot in diameter.

Thus, in a balloon of sixty feet in diameter, if we suppose the whole
load to have been 6000 pounds, the compression of the bag would only
amount to five-thirds of a pound for each circle of a foot in diameter
in the horizontal action, or corresponding to the 979th part of the
entire pressure of the atmosphere.

But the weight of the confined gas (hydrogen) being 1200 pounds, its
buoyancy must have suffered a diminution of somewhat more than a pound
or one-eleventh from the circumference opposed to it.

But as I have purposely abstained from giving in this first elementary
part any computations of an abstruse order by more learned and capable
writers than myself, I shall reserve further remarks on this particular
head for my subsequent volume.


ASCENT, OVER FIVE MILES HIGH, BY GREEN AND RUSH.

I have before me a mass of leading articles and newspaper cuttings
alluding to the ascent of Messrs. Jovis and Mallet, in which honourable
mention is made of the lofty explorations by Robertson and L’Hoest,
Gay-Lussac, Bixio, and Barral, together with Mr. Glaisher’s and my
own, but Green’s with Rush are invariably omitted, and yet these were
quite as important, while the second was higher than that made by the
intrepid French balloonists, and, so far as physical results go, the
Englishmen do not appear to have fainted or been much troubled.

It is of immense importance to note this, as there can be no doubt
that a certain zone exists, in entering which some persons are more
susceptible than others to lessened atmospheric pressure, and here they
begin to feel the bad effects, which, by the way may come on without
warning, just as it is with Alpine travellers, although there are
marked distinctions between the two, but we cannot enter upon that in
detail in this chapter.

This trip, by Green, was one of those which was designed to add a
fraction of knowledge to the already existing stores of science. This
fact is sufficient, even according to those who are not great admirers
of ballooning, to warrant its encouragement when taken in hand by
those who do not affect to be mere aëronautic performers, embarking
in aërostatic pursuits for sensational objects, or with the vain and
delusive idea, that it is not dangerous, and that it is a money-making
concern.

Mr. Rush, assisted by the knowledge of his coadjutor, threw a character
of deep interest over the whole subject of aërostation, and this
trip, though lost sight of, at the present moment, is well worthy of
re-production, serving as it does, two ends; firstly, to call attention
to the fact, that English aëronauts seem to get more toughened by
acclimatization to rarified air than Frenchmen, and secondly, that they
do such work with less ado, and with equal, perhaps a little more,
methodical foresight and precision, than our more dashing and mercurial
neighbours.

It was on the 10th of September (what a number of exceptionable
journeys were made in this month!) that the highest ascent which had
been made up to that date, came off from the far-famed Vauxhall Gardens.

The proprietors made arrangements with Mr. Rush for it to take place
in the afternoon, that gentleman engaging the car for the occasion.

The time allowed for preparation was limited. The first object to be
gained was that of diminishing the weight of the apparatus to as low a
point as due regard to their personal safety would admit.

A small car was substituted for that commonly used. At five o’clock
in the afternoon, Green ascertained the power of the gas with which
the “Nassau” balloon was charged, the tranquil state of the weather
rendered this an easy operation.

On examination, Green found that the whole weight of the balloon and
its appendages was 4,084 pounds thus constituted:

  Balloon, netting and car             700 pounds.
  Ballast                            1,500   ”
  Mr. Rush                             145   ”
  Mr. Green                            145   ”
  Light, grapnel and rope               52   ”
  Cloaks and barometers, &c.            30   ”
  Twenty-seven half-hundredweights
    slung round the hoop             1,512   ”
                                    ------
  Total                              4,084   ”
                                    ======

Please to note that Green then opened the upper valve, and
discharged a quantity of gas equal to the power of the twenty-seven
half-hundredweights, which were then removed from the hoop.

Why, you will ask, was this gas wasted, or put into the balloon? I
suppose for the sake of appearances and symmetrical distention, but
had Rush not been paymaster, it would most assuredly never have entered.

The departure took place with an ascending power of 112 pounds--very
considerable indeed.

Barometer stood at 30·50 just before leaving, and thermometer at 60°;
before seven minutes had elapsed, they had fallen, the former to 20,
and the latter to 36°, equal to 11,000 feet or two miles.

Had it not been for the miserable aspect the balloon would have
presented, more gas would have been let off equal to an additional
1,000 pounds, and then not more than 500 pounds of sand need have been
shipped.

At 11,000 feet they were driven south, after going north-east.

Green was continually casting out ballast; on attaining 16,000
feet--three miles--they entered a current blowing at the estimated
speed of sixty miles an hour, though they never stated, more’s the
pity, how under such a rocket-like rush upwards, they found time to
determine that this wonderful current existed.

The only inconvenience (this is noteworthy) Mr. Rush sustained, arose
from the constant escape of gas from the rapid ascent.

Mr. Green suffered severely from the cold in his hands and feet.

They were now exposed to the influence of roaring winds, but from what
I can make out, it was only the effect of quick vertical ascent; here
the aëronaut, owing to the exertion he had to undergo, found it a
matter of the utmost difficulty to fetch his breath.

The greatest altitude reached was 27,146 feet, indicating an elevation
from the earth of 5 miles and 746 feet, the barometer, at this point
having fallen from 30·50 to 11, and the thermometer from 61° to 5° or
27° below the freezing point.

Ballast had been reduced to something under seventy pounds, which Green
resolved on preserving, and the result of their descent, which was
never minutely entered into, proved the propriety of this reservation.

In the descent, they discovered something which very much bore the
appearance and consistency of snow. Mr. Rush’s attention was called
to it, but after consideration they were inclined to think that the
substance was not snow, but the dew and moisture congealed by the cold.

It would be instructive to know how Captain Jovis, who must have had
the night dew on his balloon at the early inflation in Paris, got on
in this respect. His idea was that the sun would dry the moisture,
but I was under the impression that there would scarcely be time for
a globular shaped machine to get dry all round during the inflation.
However, they may, like Green, have encountered a snow storm without
there being, as indeed was unlikely, any damp clouds overhead at that
elevation; what I mean is, if the balloon itself shed and shook off
innumerable particles of frozen moisture, there can be no wonder that
such was noticed and mistaken for a fall of snow.

After Rush and Green had hovered over Lewes in Sussex, a descent was
effected near Southover; there was not much hovering _I should say_.

In this ascent they had the double advantage of witnessing the setting
sun (prior to their quitting the earth) and on their reaching 12,500
feet of being once more within the sun’s rays.

Another important consideration bearing upon this chapter is the
celerity with which balloons make their ascent.

It is obvious that the efficient power of ascension, or the excess of
the whole buoyant force above the absolute weight of the apparatus,
would, by acting constantly, produce always an accelerated motion. But
this is very soon checked, and a uniform progress maintained by the
increasing resistance which the huge mass must encounter in its passage
through the air.

The velocity which a balloon would gain from unobstructed acceleration
must, from the theory of dynamics, be to that which a falling body
acquires in the same time as the efficient buoyancy is to the aggregate
weight of the apparatus and of the contained fluid. Thus, if a balloon
were to rise with a force equal to the eighth part of its compound
weight, the celerity resulting from a constant acceleration would be
expressed by multiplying four feet into the number of seconds elapsed
since it was launched into the air. Its advance, however, being
opposed, the balloon though still affected with partial oscillations,
the final velocity is effected in perhaps little more than double the
time required without such obstruction.

This final velocity, or the velocity at which the ascent becomes
uniform, the resistance from the air being then equal to the efficient
buoyancy of the balloon, is easily calculated.

The resistance a circle encounters in moving through any fluid in the
direction perpendicular to its plane, is measured by the weight of a
column of that fluid, having the circle for its base, and an altitude
equal to the height from which a heavy body in falling would acquire
the given celerity.

Near the level of the sea, and at the mean temperature, a column of
atmospheric air seventeen feet high, and incumbent on a circle of one
foot in diameter, weighs a pound avoirdupois, which is, therefore, the
resistance that a circle would suffer if carried forwards with the
celerity of thirty-three feet each second.

According to the same theory, however, which we owe to the sagacity
of Newton, the resistance of a sphere is just the half of that of
its generating circle, and consequently a velocity of forty-six and
two-fifths feet in a second through the air would in ordinary cases
create a resistance of one pound to a ball of one foot in diameter.

In other circumstances, the quantity of resistance must be proportional
to the square of velocities, and of the diameters. Whence, if the
buoyant power were always the same, the velocity of the ascent of a
balloon would be inversely as its diameter.

I introduce these few observations, which are by a much higher
authority than my own, because it occurred to me that my own remarks
might be considered too homely for some of those who may read these
lines, but as I have merely aimed at affording amusement with a
moderate portion of instruction, and do not write for scientific men,
but for general readers, I shall hope to gradually progress in this
treatment in a subsequent volume.


A JUMP OUT OF THE CAR IN AMERICA.

Among the numerous newspaper reports which are on my table, are several
relative to what, in plain unvarnished English, we should describe as
a parachute descent. But the one I allude to was not like Cocking’s,
Garnerin’s, Le Turr’s, or Hampton’s, it had a size and peculiarity
worth notice.

This American parachute had a very small and possibly inferior
covering; it was hardly equal to the man who is sketched with herculean
proportions, and required, one would say, a more efficient support,
especially as he indulged in no car or wicker protection, but hung
earthwards with his hands grasping the hoop.

The descent is described as successful, it was made from a balloon on
August 9th, at Rockaway, New York State, U.S.A.

The aëronaut’s name was Thomas S. Baldwin, and he first ascended in his
balloon the “City of Quincy,” which rose to a height of over a 1,000
feet, when he grasped the parachute and cut himself adrift from the
balloon.

The manœuvre shows a want of aëronautic common sense which the
newspaper description of “jumping out of the car” tends to intensify.

The time of his descent was one minute and twenty-four seconds.

It is said, that to the spectators below, a white cloud seemed to
fall. For a distance of seventy-five feet the parachute gave no signs
of expansion, and it was feared that another death would be added
to the roll of those who have made this perilous experiment. Then
the umbrella-like mass spread and hung like a white dome over the
aëronaut’s head.

It soon rolled in circles with a slight rocking and swaying motion
from side to side, until at length Mr. Thomas S. Baldwin was landed,
or rather watered, to a depth of only a few feet, apparently none the
worse after a renewed acquaintance with his mother earth.


AN ENGLISHMAN’S PARACHUTE DESCENT IN 1839.

Mr. John Hampton, with whom I first ascended, came down three times
in a newly constructed apparatus which was in many respects superior
to the American’s. The upper part of Hampton’s parachute was, in all
respects, in the form of an umbrella, having whalebone ribs, and a
curtain besides, below the ribs, like the sunshades patronized by the
ladies not long since.

Mr. Hampton determined, in the summer of 1839, to outstrip all
competition by descending, after leaving the Montpelier Gardens, at
Cheltenham, by stealth, in his balloon “Albion.” The fate of Mr.
Cocking, and the censure which the proprietors of Vauxhall Gardens
incurred, induced the owner of the Montpelier Gardens to withhold his
consent to the experiment, but in order to carry out Mr. Hampton’s firm
resolve and to gratify the curiosity of an immense number of spectators
that were assembled upon that occasion, the manager agreed that the
balloon and parachute should be exhibited, but on no account should
ascend higher than sixty feet from the earth for fear of accident.

When Mr. Hampton had reached this altitude, he severed the rope which
held his balloon, and the astonished spectators then beheld the
intrepid aëronaut majestically sailing towards the clouds previous to
his separation.

At two miles from the earth (let us say, rather, at a fair elevation),
he determined upon cutting away; but previously, he opened his
parachute by means of a small block and rope before he separated it
from the balloon, and by adopting that plan made an easy and safe
descent at Copperley.

His second attempt was from Cremorne Gardens, Chelsea, when he came
down in fine style, and was conducted back to the Gardens, accompanied
by an immense concourse of people, who were not sparing in their
approbation of his daring exploit.

The third experiment was made from Bayswater, but the parachute caught
on one of the trees in Kensington Gardens, and Mr. Hampton was thereby
injured, but soon recovered.

He managed to split his balloon with a thin cord before casting loose,
and altogether his plans were unique.




CHANNEL BALLOONING.


During the past six years some of our more daring aëronauts have
embarked in a succession of voyages from Dover and Hythe to France and
Flushing, with the idea, it would seem, of rivalling the memorable trip
made by Mr. C. Green in company with Messrs. Holland and Monck Mason,
who journeyed from Vauxhall Gardens, in the year 1836, to the Duchy of
Nassau.

A recent ascent by Mr. Morton, who is called the Birmingham Aëronaut,
has had newspaper laudation, but aëronautically speaking, it does not
surpass or equal Mr. Joseph Simmonds’ journeys in length and risky
surroundings, nor General Brine’s, and Mr. Dale’s performance, nor the
late Colonel Burnaby’s ascent from Dover, which extended beyond Dieppe,
and was made in Mr. Thomas Wright’s balloon. Mr. Morton’s trip is not
equal to the preceding, though unexpectedly good in its way.

The laboured efforts and fatal results of some of the later attempts
to cross over do not raise the estimation in which ballooning is held.
They would have been better left alone. Many of the mishaps, and they
have been frequent, point to perils which the old masters neither saw
or complained about, whereas our modern heroes ought to be more expert.

We have also lately had a touch or two of what may be correctly
styled _Bogus Ballooning_. I refer to more than one report about a
cross-Channel run, which never took place, as I have ascertained after
ample enquiry. However I am well aware that the press cannot always
escape this sort of imposition being practised upon reporters who are
not proof against a hoax. I remember that when Henson’s flying machine
was completed, a morning newspaper of high standing contained thrilling
details of a first flight, which was merely a flight of fancy after
all, as the ponderous mass never budged an inch.

In a later volume of my experiences I shall have to notice, on arriving
at the proper date, the impediments and drawbacks to the advancement of
ballooning.

It is known to those who admire and aim at promoting this subject
that a few would-be inventors and so-called scientific men, who trade
and traffic in this and other cognate arts actually retard instead of
furthering aërostatics, they hold out false hopes, hoist false colours,
and deceive the very elect, the result being that aërostation is at a
stand still, or, in fact, loses _caste_ to some extent.

Let us trust that these hints will lead to a new and brighter era,
when military and meteorological ballooning will be further applied to
useful objects, and that both combined, aided by sincere and competent
abettors, will bring about the solution of aërial navigation.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Perceived typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

  Some German words and phrases that are obviously misspelled have been
    retained as printed.

  On page 31, it appears that a word is possibly missing in the sentence
    beginning ‘Somewhat lower down, at a hard where boats could be pulled
    up...’

  On page 72, ‘1320 feet per second’ should be ‘1320 feet per minute.’





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY LIFE AND BALLOON EXPERIENCES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


