The Project Gutenberg eBook of Terror out of the past
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Terror out of the past

Author: Raymond Z. Gallun

Illustrator: Julian S. Krupa

Release date: February 22, 2025 [eBook #75441]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago, IL: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, 1940

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TERROR OUT OF THE PAST ***





                        Terror out of the Past

                         By Raymond Z. Gallun

             Perry Wilcox descends into the earth to solve
           the secret of an incredibly ancient civilization.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Amazing Stories March 1940.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




"Rod!" Perry Wilcox shouted above the sound of bracewires singing in
the slipstream: "In the name of Mathuselah! Look! there!"

Doctor Roderick Murgatroyd's shrewd old eyes probed swiftly along
the line of Perry's pointing arm. For a moment he couldn't get it at
all--couldn't see what hundreds of airmen, flying over this place
during the past three or four decades, had missed entirely. But then,
as Perry circled the plane around in a steep bank, it came over the old
adventurer-scientist gradually.

There was a humping configuration of those hills down there--faint in
outline as an old footprint in a rainwashed garden. It couldn't have
been noticed from the ground in a million years, and even from this
altitude it was as vague in outline as the memory of a dream.

The hills below looked like a gigantic Indian Mound, a mile in extent,
and perfectly though dimly triangular. Regularly placed along its
straight sides, were humps--foggy nodules--suggesting somehow the ruins
of massive turrets, lying buried beneath layer on layer of repeated
glacial silt.

Rod Murgatroyd began to cuss, half to relieve his feelings and half as
though to drive away the possibility that he and Perry were mistaken.

"By the nine gods!" he roared back through the propstream. "It's a
fortress, Perry! You can almost see the battlements! But who in the
name of the Cyclops could have built it? And when? And what in heck are
we gonna do about it, Perry?..." Murgatroyd's voice was almost a whine
of eagerness at the end.

Perry Wilcox was grinning broadly. "Do?" he returned, knowing that
Rod had already passed the obvious answer and was planning far ahead.
"What are you asking me that for? It ain't much of a riddle, is it?" He
swung the plane into the wind, and began the glide toward Schroeder's
hayfield.

Forty-eight hours afterwards, behind a high board fence, erected for
secrecy--that is, as much secrecy as they could hope to achieve in
surroundings that knew them well--the small crew they had assembled was
busy. A heavy diesel motor pounded steadily, driving a rotary drill
that was digging deep into the side of a low knoll.

For weeks the work went on. Five separate shafts were sunk into the
ground, the first four of them reaching down to the solid stratum of
fire rock, below the lowest and oldest fossil levels. From the depths
of those first four shafts the drill brought up pieces of stone, some
of which had angular corners, like carven blocks. And there were great
lumps of rust too, that might have been reenforcing bars of steel.
Thus the mystery deepened, taking on qualities of nervous unrest and
expectancy.

And then, far down in the fifth shaft, the spinning diamond points of
the drill snarled into a new medium. An hour later, in the summer dusk,
Roderick Murgatroyd stood shifting a few ounces of muck, brought up
from the excavation, back and forth between his palms. Most of it was
grey volcanic stuff, but mingled with it were long shreds of metal,
scored out by the drillpoints. The metal was as soft and pliable as
lead, but it possessed a very considerable tensile strength. Tests
had already proved that it was lead, alloyed with certain rare-earth
elements, probably to increase its toughness, and to render it immune
to the ravages of time.

"It's true, Perry," Murgatroyd said very quietly to the younger man
beside him. "Truer than we could have quite understood before. Metal
down there shows that. A carefully prepared alloy, such as only a very
well developed metallurgical science could have produced. A layer, or a
shell. Or maybe just a block. We don't know yet.

"Yes, we're on the right trail, Perry, even if it does look like
a wild trail! Only yesterday the drill brought up fossils of an
_undisturbed_ stratum belonging to the Jurassic Period, the Age
of Reptiles many millions of years ago! That means, Perry--" and the
old Scotch-American's voice was still more vibrant and tense--"that
means that this lead alloy was made and put into place before--long
before--the time of the dinosaurs. In fact, if we are to judge from
the stratum immediately surrounding the metal, it is contemporary with
the Carboniferous Era or Coal Period. That's the point, Perry. There
weren't any men on this planet at that time. And there weren't going to
be any men for ages and ages. At least not Earth men...."

Perry Wilcox nodded, controlling his own taut nerves. They were right
at the edge of a staggering discovery, he was sure. It might break any
minute, now, or any hour. The drill machinery still vibrated, boring
into that mass of metal deep in the ground. The pumps, sucking seepage
water out of the excavation, still throbbed. The two men's ears were
tuned to the sound of the machinery. Any shift or change in the regular
beat of the drill would have a story to tell. Thus they waited, as
night began to fall, slowly but surely.

       *       *       *       *       *

They hadn't heard the soft purr of an expensive automobile on the
roadway beyond the fence, at the foot of the slope. But now the sounds
of a brief, angry argument at the gate, some hundred yards away, drew
their startled, nervous attention. With so much that was unknown and
unhintable pending, this was hardly the time to receive visitors of any
kind, certainly not hostile visitors with ideas of their own.

Uneasily, Wilcox and Murgatroyd turned to face a group of people
hurrying toward them across the intervening area of the fenced
enclosure. One was a trusted workman, left to guard the gate. But the
others--there were four men and a girl--had been able to overrule the
guard's refusal to admit them.

Of the four men, three were burly, massive specimens with the scars of
many combats marking their coarse features. The fourth was slender and
bent, maybe fifty. His head was entirely bald, his cheeks had withered
lines in them, and his squinted piggish eyes held a look of secretive,
hungry searching.

Murgatroyd and Wilcox had no trouble recognizing this uninvited guest,
who clearly was the master mind of the intruding group. All the world
knew Lyman Kerwin, whose colossal fortune had thrust dominance-seeking
tentacles into most of the key industries of America. Path of Progress,
Rod's and Perry's outfit, had tangled with him once. They'd taken
newsreel pictures of the collapse of one of the gigantic but poorly
constructed power and irrigation dams which he had built in one of
the western states. Hundreds of people had been killed, and thousands
had been rendered homeless by a disaster traceable to materials and
workmanship far less costly than specified. Only Kerwin's money,
fixing a corrupt court, had enabled him to escape the consequences of
criminal misrepresentation.

Seeing Kerwin, and the inquiring speculative glances he cast about the
enclosure, Doctor Murgatroyd's pointed red face suddenly darkened with
fury, chagrin, and something like a nameless, nervous panic.

"Thunder of Jupiter!" he whispered hoarsely. "That polecat would have
to barge in now--now, of all times! We might have known it, Perry! But
you just wait till I sail into him! The dirty--"

Perry silenced the old scientist with a poke in the ribs. "You keep
still," he ordered. "Just make believe you're bossing the drill crew."

       *       *       *       *       *

The young man advanced slowly a few steps toward the intruders. He
didn't grin or scowl. He just kept his face straight, ready to meet
Kerwin in whatever manner the latter might ask for by his actions or
words. Perry did notice the girl in the party, though--briefly. She
was walking beside Kerwin. Chestnut curls peeped from beneath an odd
little hat. There was a sprinkling of freckles across her tanned,
earnest face. Perry knew her slightly. She was Lyssa Arthurs, better
known as Troubles, reporter for a paper in the neighboring town of
Brenton. Cute, plucky kid, but she seemed a little self-conscious now.
And evidently she had strange tastes in company. Perry dismissed her
presence with a curt nod that could hardly have been called a greeting.

When he spoke, Kerwin didn't allow a lot of room for doubt as to his
attitude, in spite of the veiled terms he used.

"Hello, Wilcox!" he hailed volubly in a rich voice that was in sharp
contrast with his cadaverous appearance. "I thought I'd call, since
you and the Professor are always doing such interesting things. What's
up? Boring for oil or something?"

Perry kept silent, waiting for Kerwin to talk a little more.

"You might as well answer my question, Wilcox," the financier urged.
"I'll find out anyway, you know."

"Maybe they're diggin' a road down to China, Chief," one of Kerwin's
bodyguards offered with dry and slightly sinister humor. "Or a nice,
deep hole to bury themselves in."

Before Perry could speak there was an interruption. The sound of the
drill nearby, busy in the dusk, changed abruptly. There was a grating,
hollow noise from far underground. Then the whine of machinery racing
without resistance. Out of the pipe which ejected the muck and chipped
stone and metal shreds brought up from the drilling, there came a
gurgling puff, as of air trapped in a subterranean cavern, and under
slightly higher pressure than that of the surface, being suddenly
released from confinement.

Workmen leaped to throw out the clutch of the big diesel. Old Rod
Murgatroyd began to swear excitedly, for it was clear what had
happened. The drill had broken through the metal at last. It had
reached a hollow space down there. A room, a chamber, perhaps, which
the shell of lead alloy was meant to protect.

Perry Wilcox felt his pulses racing wildly. The presence of Kerwin
could not spoil his sense of victory. In the evening air around him
there was suddenly a faint, musty odor, like that of an old cellar, but
with a distinctive quality all its own.

Perry saw the workmen step back from the machinery, as if they didn't
know quite what to do or say. And he could tell, too, that the
sudden cessation of movement, and that noisome smell, indescribably
suggestive of a time that was dead for incredible eons, had had its
effect on Lyman Kerwin. Kerwin's lips dangled loosely, and his eyes had
lost a lot of their squint. His face was sweaty, and paler than usual.

"You asked what was up, Kerwin," Perry growled at last. "Well, so
far we've tried to keep our work here dark so we could get the
first investigations completed without interference. But I guess
there's no use to stall. You said you'd find out anyway, and you're
right--whatever good that'll do you. I think everybody'll get the story
in a few days, or even hours. I suppose somebody tipped you off about
what we were doing--somebody who lives around here." Perry grinned
crookedly at the girl, Lyssa Arthurs, as he made this half accusation.

"But it doesn't matter," he went on. "You saw what just happened,
Kerwin. We've evidently reached something with the drill. I don't know
what--yet. But it's terribly old, Kerwin. And get this--there's metal
down there--a perfectly balanced alloy as old as the Carboniferous
fossils! Yes, it's pretty big, Kerwin! And liable to be--dangerous!
Why, hell, even that cellar stench that came up from down there might
actually be poisonous! It might contain microscopic spores that, in
contact with human lungs, could grow and kill. Spores from the past,
Kerwin. Sealed up and kept alive through the ages. Of course it's a
thin possibility, but who can say? Do you still want to hang around,
Kerwin?"

The latter's retreat was just a trifle too quick for good poise, and
the sudden fury of his expression wasn't good form either.

"Rot, Wilcox!" he half stammered and half roared as he backed away.
"You're talking rot!"

Perry could almost feel sorry for him at that moment. Full of
hypochondriac fear, inspired by nothing but the slenderest of chances,
Kerwin was trying to mask his cowardice by a show of scorn.

But Perry could feel sorrier for Lyssa Arthurs. Troubles, she was
called. And she looked regular, all right.... But why was she hanging
around with Kerwin?

Now Kerwin made a nervous, jerking sign to his henchmen.

"Come on, boys," he said. "We might as well leave these fools to their
silly grubbing."

Even the three pug-uglies looked a bit sheepish at the hasty departure
their boss led them into.

       *       *       *       *       *

Workmen were grinning and chuckling as Perry turned about, and old Rod
Murgatroyd's red face was alight with amusement and satisfaction.

"You sure told that ninny where to dump himself, pal," he complimented,
his blue eyes seeming to twinkle even in the dusk.

Perry's answering smile was brief. He glanced toward the fence, from
beyond which came the sounds of Kerwin's car speeding away along the
concrete road.

"Only," Murgatroyd added, sobering, "I don't think we're through with
our playmate yet, Perry. You've got him doubly sore at us now, for
making him ridiculous. And he's not so scared that he won't do his
damnedest to get even--if nothing else. And--glory but it would be
tough to have him mixing in with something really colossal, wouldn't
it? What we've got here could be good for all humanity--it could be
neutral, or it could be bad. We don't know. But good or bad, depend on
Kerwin to make it the latter, if he gets the chance!"

Perry shrugged ruefully. "Yeah," he said. "That means we've got to
work quick, Rod. One of us has got to go down there into the bore on
a cable--find out just what we're up against in that quarter. Then
there'll still be time to see if we can get digging options on the
surrounding country--if it turns out to be advisable. Kerwin can't very
well beat us to that, anyway. Now who'll it be that goes down there
first?"

Perry Wilcox drew a nickel from his pocket. He flipped it dexterously
into the air, caught it and slapped it onto the back of his other hand.

"Buffalo!" old Rod called.

Perry raised his palm to reveal a shiny Indian head. "I win," he
remarked, grinning.




                              CHAPTER II

                         Mystery Below Ground


Lights were snapped on in the gathering darkness. Long lengths of
drill-shaft were pulled out of the boring, whose dark maw hid the
unknown.

Perry put on a coverall garment of rubberized silk. Over his face he
fitted an oxygen mask, and to his shoulders he attached several oxygen
bottles. The air blow, after so many countless ages of stagnation,
would probably be unbreathable. And though Perry had meant merely to
unnerve Kerwin when he had mentioned the possibility of some kind of
contamination, one could not quite be sure. It was best to have one's
body encased in a sealed garment.

When he had completed his preparations, there was even a small toolkit
at his hip. Attached to an elbow there was a powerful electric lamp,
fitted with a long cord by means of which it could draw power from the
generator here on the surface. And there was a small phone incorporated
into his headgear. With the phone, like a subsea diver, he could
maintain communication with Rod and the rest of the crew here above
ground. And of course he had his motion picture camera--strapped across
his chest.

With a stout steel cable fastened under his armpits, Perry clambered
over the edge of the boring, and was lowered below. The trip
down--nearly three hundred feet--was uneventful. The stillness in the
narrow shaft, scarcely wider than his shoulders, deepened with the
depth of his descent. There was only the scraping of his kit against
the rough walls, and the sleepy trickle of seepage water.

He reached the punctured metal barrier at last, and passed through it.
Two feet thick, the shell was. A moment later his feet touched a solid
floor, wet with the water that had dribbled down through the opening.

"I'm here, Rod," Perry called into the phone. "At the bottom."

It was a moment before the older man answered, and in this interval
Perry heard disquieting sounds from the phones over his ears--sounds
from the surface, which seemed so infinitely far away to him now.
Automobile motors racing. Voices in much larger numbers than those of
the small drill crew. And to Perry Wilcox came a conviction of pending
trouble.

Then Murgatroyd spoke: "We've got company up here, Perry," he said, a
note of anxiety in his tone. "A lot of curious people from Brenton.
Sight-seers rushing to a fire, so to speak. Kerwin couldn't think of
anything dirtier to do to gum up the works for us, so he spread the
news around that something was up out here. Naturally I've got a whole
crowd on my hands. We're trying to keep 'em outside the fence. Of
course they ought to be harmless enough, really; but damn it, I wish
they'd go someplace else! What do you see down there?"

Perry had his electric lamp blazing at full now. On his chest, his
camera, driven by a little spring motor, was turning. And he was
staring about him intently, to grasp the character of his surroundings.
He began to talk--to describe what he saw and felt.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm in a passage, Rod," he said. "It slants down. Its alloy walls
are all bent and crumpled. It must have been the movement of the
ground through the ages that did that. Gosh, Rod, but you can feel the
length of eternity here! It's written in these tunnel walls, Rod. The
way they're bent and rebent. I can understand now why they were made
of something tough and pliable, like this lead alloy. It's twisted
everywhere, but unbroken. They--whoever built this place--must have
known pretty well what they were doing--whatever their purpose was...."

Perry advanced slowly down the slope of the tunnel, cautiously drawing
his descent cable and his telephone and electric cords after him.

He reached a room of heroic dimensions, walled with the same grey alloy
as the tunnel. The Stygian gloom that obscured it parted before the
intense white path of his lamp.

There were tall metal boxes, like packing cases for heavy machinery,
arranged in rows on the buckled and humped pavement of the
chamber--metal boxes, each with a closed and perhaps hermetically
sealed door. And near the farther wall was a machine--an engine or
something--that displayed a gigantic, dusty fly-wheel. The walls,
at a head-high level, were covered with something crystalline, like
glass; though where it had bent it had bent like metal--not shattering
as a brittle substance would have done. Behind those crystal panes
were compartments, housing queer, complicated devices. They looked
a little like astronomical or surveying instruments, Perry thought.
Were they perhaps instruments for the navigation of interplanetary or
interstellar space?

Seeing charts traced on the walls above the compartments that protected
this array of apparatus--charts dotted with winking, diamond-bright
bits of glass, which must represent scattered suns of the void--he
was half sure that his guess was right. The charts were marked with
countless interlocking lines and circles, which might be the geometric
equivalent of latitude and longitude, applied not to the navigation
of the ocean, but to the limitless, three-dimensional reaches of the
cosmos.

This much Perry Wilcox was able to note, before his eager inspection
was interrupted. In the heavy stillness there was a rustling whisper,
which penetrated easily the thin, rubberized fabric of his hoodlike
mask. The sound swiftly built itself up into a regular, soft rhythm.
Perry spoke a few warning words about this development into his phone,
and described briefly the room he was in. Meanwhile he stared ahead,
ready in every taut nerve and muscle to leap out of danger, yet eager
to see what it was that caused the disturbance.

His lamp beam focused on the engine near the opposite wall. Its
fly-wheel was turning, maybe after half a billion years of motionless
waiting in this sealed vault. But why? How?

Perry bounced back a step, icy fingers of dread tickling his flesh. "On
your marks up there, Rod," he said tensely into his phone. "I can't
tell what kind of a show it is I've started; but you may have to yank
me up in a hurry!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The engine was whizzing now, ancient dust spraying from its fly-wheel.
For a few seconds there were no more developments, except that Perry
noticed the decorative frieze around the high, shadowy ceiling.
Human faces carved in the metal. They smiled down on the young man
mysteriously.

Then there was a soft clank in the far distance, muffled apparently
by the turn of many passages, and echoed back and forth by crumpled,
vaulted ceilings and walls. The sound might have been that of a door
opening, or the rattling of chains. Perry was beginning to feel very
much like beating a hasty retreat; but he waited a trifle longer.

There came, then, a ponderous, soft thudding, growing nearer. It wasn't
till the impression of the sound clicked into a groove in his mind,
establishing itself as identical with the regular thud-thud of great,
running, elastic-shod feet, entirely inhuman in their note, that he
concluded that discretion was the better part of valor.

He had farther to return than he realized. And his electric and
telephone cords, his hoist cable, hampered him.

"Draw in the slack of my rig," he shouted into his phone. "And for
Pete's sake, if you love me, set the hoist winch going when I tell you!"

He got beneath the bore that penetrated the tunnel roof okay. But the
thudding was catching up on him fast. "Up!" he yelled. "Quick!"

It seemed a century before he felt the reassuring tug of the cable
under his arms. He had a chance to look back once into the Stygian
darkness that concealed a reawakening and incredible ancientness. There
a little red light wavered and hurtled nearer.

Perry's feet left the metal pavement. He heard a hiss, like escaping
steam, just as he was drawn up into the narrow bore. Something clanked
and scraped beneath him, like claws raking at his retreat. And the
hissing continued.

He thought he could relax then, a little. But as he was pulled farther
up the bore he felt heat burning through his rubberized silk coverall.
It was just a harmless warmth at first, but it increased to a burning
sensation about his legs. It made him dizzy and sick, and clouded his
brain.

He heard Rod Murgatroyd yelling at him through the phone: "What's the
matter, Perry? What's up?" And behind the voice of his friend there
was the murmur of many other voices. The sightseers from Brenton. They
didn't have any business being there; but if anything happened--if they
got hurt--it was his and Rod's fault. Even though Kerwin, or someone
under Kerwin's orders, had tipped them off for mere malice.

"Back!" Perry yelled. "Order everybody back! When you pull me up, Rod,
don't touch me without gloves! And breathe cautiously. Gas, I think.
Some kind of corrosive gas...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The rest, for a while, was like a bad dream to Wilcox. He became aware
of stars overhead, and of wind. He was up in the open air once more.
Nearby, Herkett, one of the drill crew, was swearing at the inquisitive
onlookers, trying to send them on their way. Some were retreating.
Others, held by a kind of fascination, still crowded forward against
the fence, and met Herkett's blasphemous pleas with boos, or ignored
them with a kind of self-conscious indifference.

Perry was sick with that intense, burning pain in his right leg.
To keep his senses was a struggle. He heard noises from within the
Earth--like ragged drumbeats that made the ground shake. Something
unknown, crescendoing on to a preplanned purpose. Hands touched
him--Rod's hands, covered with thick gloves. Car headlights flared all
around in the night, mingling confusingly with the chaos of voices.
Perry's rubber-silk outer garment was crumbling away from him like
rotten rags. It had been eaten by a virulently active gaseous chemical,
all right. Like combustion, the activity had evolved heat. He was still
alive only because he was wearing an oxygen mask.

He tried to stand, clinging to Rod's shoulders; but the burnt leg,
which might still put him in danger of death by an unknown chemical
poison, would not bear his weight. He sank down to one knee while Rod
tore the remnants of rotted rubber and cloth from his leg, and smeared
an unguent on the ragged, blistered injury.

"I'll get him to a doctor," someone was saying from very close by. "You
can't tell. That's apt to be very dangerous. A physician will know
better what to do."

It wasn't till then that Perry saw who it was that was holding the
first aid kit. Lyssa Arthurs, the girl who had been with Kerwin and
his boys. But she'd come back, somehow. Looking up into the confusing
medley of light and shadow, Perry saw her curly chestnut hair blowing
in the wind. She looked a little bedraggled, and her lips were pursed
very tight.

"Okay!" old Rod snapped, for this moment might involve the question
of life and death for his friend, and there was no time to question
the connections of this girl, who had been helpful. "Come on, you!" he
added, grasping Perry's arm. "You're out of action for a while!"

Perry Wilcox was too dazed to think of all the reasons why he didn't
want to be taken away from the scene of action now, and why he
didn't want to go with anyone associated with Lyman Kerwin. So his
stubborn protests were mostly those of a hard man of action, clinging
obstinately to the habit of wanting to be where things were happening.

"Can't leave, Rod!" he grumbled like a great obstinate, drunken child.
"Everybody's in danger of--God knows what. Gotta stay with you,
Rod...." His words were muffled by his mask.

A moment Murgatroyd hesitated, then his balled fist shot out and caught
Perry on the chin with stunning force.

What he'd seen of Troubles Arthurs in the last few seconds made the
old scientist like her a lot. But since she was tied up with Kerwin
someway, he couldn't trust her entirely with the custody of his pal. So
he said:

"Thanks, kid. Otto, here, will go along to help."

Almost as an afterthought, Rod unsnapped the motion picture camera from
Perry's chest. Its record of a mystery would be safer in his keeping.

       *       *       *       *       *

Otto, one of the drill crew, a great, blond bear of a man, picked Perry
up and followed the girl through the throng to her car. In a moment it
was speeding away toward Brenton.

But it hadn't gone far before the sounds of a fresh disturbance issued
from the enclosure it had recently quitted. To the thudding from
beneath the Earth, was added a droning note, faint but infinitely
far-reaching. It was like the drone of a solitary electric generator
in a deserted powerhouse at night. And there was a puffing noise from
the direction of the enclosure. Voices waxed to screams. First of plain
terror; then some of them changed to yelps of agony.

The reviving Perry half rose in the back seat of the speeding car. Then
Otto, with all the good intentions in the world followed Murgatroyd's
original example, hit Perry on the chin, and told the frightened girl
up ahead to drive faster.

Meanwhile, safe in a hotel room in Brenton, a man sat at a writing
table and waited. Lyman Kerwin had just received a phone call. One
couldn't tell, yet, what was happening. But Kerwin's mind was quick
and cold and ruthless. And somewhere in all this he saw a lot to his
advantage--if he played his cards right.




                              CHAPTER III

                        A War Against Machines


It was many hours later before the doctors at the Brenton hospital
knew that Wilcox was out of danger. The gas that had burnt him was a
little like mustard gas in its action, though more virulent; and it had
narcotic properties that could function through a burn. With the danger
from poison past, the injury was small.

But it was still more hours before Wilcox came out of the daze that
had slipped over him. The immediate cause of his awakening from heavy
slumber, was the roar of a squadron of airplanes, passing over the
hospital roof.

He sat up dizzily. In the distance he could hear a muted mutter and
clank. Then a series of heavy explosions. He looked about, noticing
only subconsciously that he was in a hospital ward. His gaze settled
immediately on the nearest window. Weakly he climbed out of bed and
limped and staggered toward it.

The view extended for miles to the north, across the little city, and
across the hills and woods and fields beyond. Everything he could see
had the look of a place in close proximity to the no-man's-land of a
great war. Lorries, loaded with troops, were moving in the streets.
Tanks roared. Supply trucks, most of them pulling guns, moved in a
ragged stream.

Perry's face went haggard and drawn as he looked for the airplanes
he had heard. Far up, he saw three. Huge bombers in the clear air.
Clusters of black specks trailed down from them--bombs released from
the racks. And in the hills beneath there were geysers of flying earth,
followed by dull concussions.

Then unseen, hurtling vengeance touched each of the planes in
succession. From somewhere in the sylvan terrain beneath, there were
three faint pops. A second later, one of the bombers dissolved into a
silvery cloud--duralumin and steel. It was the same with the other two
planes. They fell apart as though all the cohesive force of the metals
from which they were made was suddenly disrupted. The men aboard them
hadn't a chance.

Perry Wilcox gulped painfully as his eyes searched the wooded hills,
trying to orient things so that he could tell just where Murgatroyd's
and his fenced enclosure had been. He couldn't see the fence. It was
too far off and was hidden by the trees. But he did see a ragged line
of peculiar upjutting earthworks. It appeared to follow the contour of
the mounted mystery that he had first observed from the air. Shells
from man-made cannon splashed against it.

Just for a moment a gleaming colossus reared its hunched bulk behind
the barrier. It glistened in the late afternoon sunshine as it seemed
to take a look about; then like a lizard retreating into its hole, it
slid back, from view. But behind it there were sounds like the working
of great forges. Columns of smoke puffed up, dyed with the red of
molten metal.

His attention was attracted to something else. Beyond the partly
raised window, and across the street, he could hear a radio in one of
the houses there. He bent forward tautly, straining his ears to listen.
The voice was unpleasantly familiar:

"The latest newsflashes give us little hope. Our attacking forces
are being beaten back, or destroyed. But we have great resources. We
must be brave. The enemy is a strange one. We must amass more men,
conscript money for war materials. Billions of dollars. That is our
hope, our one chance. We must have a strong central government. That
means the absolute leadership of one man. Obedience must be the key. My
whole resources are at the disposal of the nation. We will triumph! We
must! The Murgatroyd-Wilcox Horror will thus be destroyed. Be strong,
friends. Be strong. That is all for now...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Before the brief, artfully worded speech was half delivered, Perry
Wilcox knew a good deal of what was spoken between its treacherous
lines. The rich, semi-hysterical voice, seemingly overflowing with holy
patriotism, had been unmistakable. Lyman Kerwin. But before Perry had
time quite to digest this knowledge, someone called from behind him:

"Hey, fella, you're supposed to be in bed!"

Perry swung about, startled, forgetful of his injured leg. He
confronted cool dark eyes with a quiet, half smiling challenge in them.
It was Lyssa Arthurs again. Perry was glad to see her for a second,
then he remembered.

"Well, what do you want?" he blurted sullenly.

"I've signed up for emergency work, and I was put in charge of this
ward," she responded frankly, making a plain effort to avoid a painful
clash of personalities.

But Wilcox was in no mood to take the hint. "Yeah?" he grunted. "Well,
I seem to remember that it was you who brought me here to the hospital.
For that, thanks! Otherwise, why don't you go hang around Kerwin some
more? He's ambitious and capable! He can do things for an up and
coming newspaper woman like you! Why I just heard him make the nicest,
smuggest little speech you ever could imagine--over the radio. All
about conscripting more money and men, and putting the country under
the absolute control of one leader--himself, of course--to fight what
he calls the Murgatroyd-Wilcox Horror. But I can see through him as
though he was glass! He controls most of the munitions plants on the
continent. The money'll go to him!

"But that's penny-pickings! He talks about absolute obedience. Sure!
With himself as boss! Kerwin talks smooth. There's only one thing I
can't understand about him. He's as yellow as a hyena. How he can find
the nerve to talk fight now, is more than I can see!"

The girl regarded Perry coolly, after he had finished. "I'll be kinder
than you've been to me, Mr. Wilcox," she said at last. "It's the
privilege of all sincere science to explore the unknown. You and Mr.
Murgatroyd did just that when you dug into those hills. You had no idea
what would happen. But the result _is_ your responsibility. As for
my being with Kerwin--it's not your business, of course, but I may not
have enjoyed that myself. It happens he owns most of the _Brenton
Herald_, for which I work. He asked me to come along with him to
visit the site of your excavations, and I couldn't very well refuse.
It happens too, that I didn't tell him that you were digging there, in
case you're accusing me of that. But there are plenty of sources from
which he could have gotten information to arouse his curiosity. You
are well known, and people are curious. But of course all this petty
explanation of mine can't mean much now."

Perry bit his lip, feeling briefly sorry that he'd openly connected
Lyssa Arthurs with the Kerwin outfit. But he was by no means ready to
trust her either.

The rumble of shells, exploding miles off, beat into his mind. There
was a mysterious hiss, followed by the screams of dying men. Perry
winced. It was logical of course that soldiers should be sent to attack
whatever it was out there; but he was sure that Kerwin must have some
special knowledge about the enigma up his sleeve, or else he'd never
have the guts to be delivering radio lectures that didn't say anything
about running away.

"I don't know enough!" he groaned aloud. "I was put out of action too
quick to see just what took place at the excavation. I can't judge--"

Suddenly he grasped the girl by the shoulders. "Where's Murgatroyd?" he
grated. "Does anybody know?"

Troubles Arthurs stayed cool, in spite of his fury. "Why yes," she
said. "He's here." She nodded toward a hospital bed against the wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

Perry staggered toward the inert form which lay there. Rod, his head
swathed in bandages, was completely unrecognizable. His features were
covered.

"Gas, same as hit me?" Wilcox asked the girl.

"No," she whispered. "Some kind of beam of concentrated heat waves.
It's his eyes, mostly."

"How long was he out there?" Perry questioned. "What I mean is, how
long did he stay in action before he got hurt?"

"About two hours, I think," the girl responded. "He helped with the
first civilian wounded, managing to stay clear of the gas himself.
There was an explosion afterward. And out of the hole blown in the
ground the machines--they're like strange robots--began to emerge. That
was at ten o'clock the night before last. Mr. Murgatroyd was brought in
at eleven o'clock, so he must have been active for half an hour after
the explosion."

Perry had heard enough. He bent over the bed of his friend and touched
his shoulder. "Hey, Rod!" he called. "Hey, this is Perry! Wake up, you
old son-of-a-gun!" Perry's vision was misted.

Murgatroyd groaned and stirred. When he spoke, however, he seemed
lucid, his mind clearing after the long siege of unconsciousness,
caused by his head injury. "Hello, fella," he muttered, turning his
face toward the sound of Perry's voice as though trying to peer through
the bandages that covered his damaged eyes.

"Rod," the young man whispered. "I want you to concentrate--try to
remember. We've got a big job that's our personal concern. But it's
more than that. It's a danger concerning the whole country--maybe
the whole world. Just what kind of an enemy is out there, Rod? Those
robots. What are they? Is anybody controlling them? Or do they think
for themselves? Do you know anything about them, Rod? Anything at all?"

The old Scotch-American's lips moved, almost hidden in the swathing of
cloth. "I guess it should--be all right," he said at last. "I guess
it's kind of--funny. Machines--think? Some might, but these--don't.
They can do things--perfectly. Like a machine that rifles a gun barrel
or predicts the tides. They're made that way. But these robots are just
refined machines--acting almost human, sure! They'd almost fool you.

"They see, they hear--in a way. They come toward you, aiming and firing
explosive slugs, or sending out beams of concentrated heat. But we
stopped a few of those robots with shells. Just adding-machine stuff
inside, Perry. Cams and rods and wires, like our inventors would build,
only a lot more wonderful and complicated. No soul could be in that,
Perry. No real consciousness. No ambition....

"Professor Vince had the wrecks hauled off--copped them for
examination. I guess he knows a lot now, Perry. He tried to talk me
into giving him your camera, with the pictures you took down in the
bore, too, Perry. But I sent the camera to the rear with one of our
men....

"As for the robots, they may be under some kind of centralized radio
control, of course. But even that can't be--real brains. It hasn't
the judgment. Any little trick, like stepping out of the path of an
automaton chasing you, and staying perfectly still, fools 'em. They go
right on past you. And you can pull the same stunt again and again. But
they're still hellish."

Old Rod paused, panting with the effort of his long explanation. Then
he went on: "So that means--there's nobody at the helm, Perry. The
whole business just goes on by itself. And it _is_ pretty awe
inspiring and wonderful at that--so damned wonderful you'd want to
cheer, if it wasn't so deadly--when a bunch of men makes an attack
against it. The thing to do is not to attack, anyway for a few days.
We'd learn more, then. Those robots are guardians of some kind, Perry.
It's a hunch of mine...."

Suddenly the old man half rose in the bed, as if the expressing of his
own thoughts had startled him. "That's the whole crazy irony of the
situation, Perry!" he cried. "Men out there, dying--and on the other
side--potential progress, inspiration, miracles! The key to a new era!
We've got to do something--Perry--now!"

For a second Roderick Murgatroyd looked like a magnificent, blinded
seer. Then he dropped back onto the bed, fainting into a coma of
fatigue. Perry touched the old man's hand with a brief pressure of
comradeship.

But at the same moment Wilcox was thinking fast to correlate his
new information. Rod had spoken of Professor Vince. Vince, a shy,
moon-faced little man, was a noted professor of physics at Kerwin
University. Vince, then, was one of Lyman Kerwin's stooges. What Vince
learned from examining the wrecked automatons, Kerwin would promptly
find out. Perry was sure he understood the setup at last.

_Kerwin knew, somehow, that what he called the Murgatroyd-Wilcox
Horror was of little danger to himself, if he kept out of the battle
zone! He was only using it as a means to his own ends. Power. Complete
control of the nation. Free access to the inventions this marvelous
archeological discovery might reveal!_

It was all too clear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Instantly Perry's plan was formulated. His injury was really
superficial, now that the effect of the poison was gone. Exertion
would work the stiffness out of his leg. But he glanced in frustrated
exasperation at the pajamas he was wearing. A second later he was
tugging at the door of the closet in the corner of the ward.

"Doggone! Where's my rig?" he was grumbling, as he clawed at the piled
contents of the closet--mostly clothing of the wounded that had not
been damaged by corrosive gas or heat.

He found his oxygen mask and tanks at last. Quite indiscriminately he
seized a shirt and a pair of trousers, and yanked them on over his
pajamas. Shoes were similarly selected and donned. Then he hurried
toward the door of the room.

Lyssa Arthurs barred his way here, her lips firm though smiling. Her
dark eyes had a roguish glint that admired and challenged. She looked
like a courageous small boy standing up for his rights, that way, Perry
thought with a strange pang.

"I'm responsible for the patients in this ward," she said pertly.
"Where do you think _you're_ going, Mister?"

Perry shoved her unceremoniously aside. "Places," he grunted almost
good-humoredly. "You said before that I had responsibilities."

He rushed down the hall. In thirty seconds he was out in the street,
with the bustle of behind-the-lines activity around him. He dodged
ahead of trucks and tanks on his way to the river.

Once, from a radio in a house he passed, he heard the rich, high voice
of Lyman Kerwin, exhorting, commanding, praising himself in subtle
terms, using fear as a means to power:

"All my resources are at the disposal of the nation to combat the
Murgatroyd-Wilcox Horror. The response has been good to our appeal for
money. But it must be better. Better! We are pitted against something
incredible--something that possesses many unknown weapons. The women
and children of America must be protected...."

Perry Wilcox growled. And almost simultaneously a youth hurled a rock
at him, shouting: "There he is! There's Wilcox, one of the two mugs who
started all the trouble!"

A gang was after Perry then, pelting stones; and he knew that Kerwin's
propaganda had already achieved a very considerable success.

But he didn't stop to argue. He just ran on, limping a little. He
reached the powerhouse dam. There he paused briefly to don his oxygen
mask and tanks. Then he leaped into the swirling water, and sank into
its concealing depths. He didn't try really to swim. He made only a few
strokes to keep himself righted, and safely beneath the surface. The
current was swift, and it flowed in the proper direction. He had air to
breathe. There was nothing much to do but wait.

Dusk began to settle. Perry heard guns on the banks of the stream, and
shouts and cries, as he drifted invisible through the human battle
lines. Presently, looking through the goggles of his air-tight oxygen
mask, he saw light around him, then darkness, then light again. It was
the regular play of a great searchbeam from up there on the hills. And
there were noises too, now loud and near. At least he'd come this far
without being detected.

Clinging to a rock of the river bottom, he waited a little till it got
darker. Then, still being careful to keep well beneath the surface of
the water, he swam toward the shore.

       *       *       *       *       *

He came up in the reeds at the river's edge, and peered cautiously
toward the low bluffs. He had to duck his head again, before he saw
anything but humping, moving shapes, and part of a great, half-restored
battlement; for the search beam, swinging majestically and regularly
back and forth, swept blindingly toward him.

But there were regular intervals between each successive blaze of
light; and these allowed him to observe. Little, gleaming robots,
walking like human beings on broad, elastic-shod feet, and provided
with metal arms, were rebuilding the battlemented wall with limestone
quarried from the hillside. They worked with perfect efficiency,
raising blocks into place, and applying a kind of mortar with
spatulate-ended arms. But their movements for each operation were
always identical, betraying not intellect but standardized mechanical
perfection.

And it was the same with the other machines and weapons. A gun--it
didn't look so very different from a familiar artillery piece, except
for its complex breech-loading mechanism, fired intermittently, without
any crew to operate it. Watching, Perry concluded that its sighting and
firing apparatus must be stimulated by certain sounds, movements, and
lights, out there where the soldiers were entrenched. For when he heard
a shout from the rear, or saw a cannon flash, or troops advancing from
the trenches, there was always a volley of small, screaming shells, the
latter directed with a precise, cold accuracy, that must depend on the
spiritless exactness of instruments. And the result was massacre.

Heat beam projectors, lensed boxes in their webwork supports, seemed to
operate under the same kinds of stimuli, turning their faint, barely
visible spears of heatwaves toward sudden light, noise, or movement.
Searchlights swept the sky, probably drawn by motor sounds. And if they
located a plane, the movement of its light-enveloped form was enough to
attract the high-angling muzzles of slender guns that fired with soft
pops, but reduced duralumin to powder. The aiming was always perfect.

When the search beam was turned away from him, Perry got cautiously out
of the water and dashed for the nearest bush. He crouched behind it,
as the beam swept past him like a great eye. Then higher, to another
bush. And so he advanced. Once, because he stumbled, he was caught in
the open; but he threw himself flat and waited, cursing his clumsiness.
But the blazing glare passed him, and no blasting death followed.
Perhaps camera eyes had photographed his inert form; but mechanical,
adding-machine brains had not enough reasoning powers to recognize
him as an interloper, as long as he did not move. Perry breathed with
relief, and continued his intermittent climb at each brief moment of
darkness.

Near the top, however, it didn't look so simple. He was hiding in a
clump of tall weeds, face to face with those guns--and nobody knew
what other deadly devices. He was stumped as to how he should try to
advance further. Make a rush? There was a pretty good chance of getting
past the guns that way, as far as he could tell by visual inspection;
but surely there'd be something there, in the narrow gaps between the
guns--something to kill him, or at least detect his presence! It made
his flesh crawl; but need gave his wits a sharper edge. He had to get
through, somehow!

He searched the line of fantastic, flame-spewing weapons avidly. A
hundred yards away there was a small break in it, where an aerial bomb,
dropped by one of the planes, had struck. The crater still smoked
with the vapors of the explosive. If there was any detecting device
there, any taut-stretched wire, or anything that would bring some death
machine into play at his accidental touch, it would be shattered, now,
and still unrepaired.

Scrambling from bush to bush during intervals of darkness, as before,
he got to the break in the line, and through it safely. Thus, he looked
at last over the hilltops, and down into the area enclosed by that
great, mounded rectangle.

It was a queer, contrasting scene. Familiar farm buildings stood out in
the weird illumination. But everywhere there were mounds of earth and
deep pits. From some of the latter, red-lit smoke trailed up toward the
stars. Massive things, not unlike army tanks, moved in circles, as if
pacing beats, and there was the muffled clang of what could be buried
factories. The old fortress had come to life once more, resurrecting
itself from its bed of Carboniferous slumber. It was a camp, bristling
with strange armaments and bustling with activity.




                              CHAPTER IV

                         Into the Robot's Lair


Perry lay prone in the high grass. He was panting and tired, and he
felt a little sick again. He knew that whatever chances he had of
accomplishing any good here, would be diminished if he waited. There
were dozens of ways of getting uselessly killed. So far he hadn't
encountered any of that corrosive gas, but hisses, and distant human
screams from the flats along the river, told him that it was being
used. And though he had his oxygen mask, his clothing and skin could be
eaten away and his blood poisoned. Two bombers burst overhead, their
powdered wreckage silvery in paths of searchlights. Perry knew he might
even be destroyed by the weapons of his own countrymen.

[Illustration: Wilcox slipped stealthily past the great robot gun.]

So his gaze settled feverishly on the nearest opening in the ground. It
wasn't far away, and its depths were lost in darkness. But twice he saw
crawling mechanical things emerge from it. It must lead, then, toward
the heart of the mystery he was trying to probe.

At the next opportunity, he made a dash for the pit. He lost his
balance in the loose soil at its edge, and tumbled to its bottom. But
except for a few scratches, he was unhurt. He picked himself up and
hurried down a steep passage. Except for lights far ahead, it was dark
as Erebus. But he advanced as rapidly as he could, his purpose only to
explore, and to take advantage of opportunity, if it came.

Once he heard the growl of machinery, as a great crawling automaton
came down the passage, moving in his direction. The headlamp threw him
into full view. And there was no place to hide. But remembering what
Rod Murgatroyd had told him about these automatons, and making use,
too, of his own experience with them, Perry flung himself against the
crumpled alloy wall and froze rigid as stone, his heart thumping madly.

The robot stopped. Its mechanical eyes must have seen his movement.
Perhaps the delicate maze of wheels and cams and instruments, which was
all it had for a brain, had responded to the stimulus of his moving
form, and was forced, by the way it was planned and built, to wait and
search for other evidence of a hostile presence. But finding none, the
robot whirred on. As it passed Perry, he felt the heat of its driving
mechanism. Through a quartz glazed spyhole in its flank, he saw a
white, blazing globe within it--perhaps a mass of material throwing off
atomic energy.

Perry's lips, sweat-daubed behind his mask, curved in a haggard smile
at his oddly miraculous escape. He continued on his way.

He had an odd, tense idea of being followed by something that was not
quite mechanical. Behind him, in the darkness, and even above the
confined din of the factories, he thought he heard, now and then, the
patter and slither of footsteps.

And so he hurried on, along the main tunnel, reaching at last a faintly
lighted, circular compartment.

In the center of the room a vat, a hundred and fifty feet across, was
sunk into the floor. Its cone-shaped interior was full of a greenish
liquid, and was covered over by an immense sealing disk of glass. There
were grids, like colossal battery plates, in the liquid. Bus-bars,
penetrating beneath the sealed edges of the glass disk, attached the
grids to an apparatus standing at the vat's circular rim. The apparatus
resembled an electrical transformer.

Just for a moment Perry was able to look. Then the light in the chamber
began to fade.

There came a rattle of opening doors as the light died completely. He
tried to hold perfectly still, as he heard the soft, heavy footfalls of
great robot-guardians released. He should be able to fool them too, by
keeping perfectly quiet.

Now, again, he heard those lighter footfalls, that had seemed to be
following him. They advanced to the entrance of the chamber. Instantly
there was an answering rush of elastic-shod feet. And then a woman's
scream!

Perry was petrified for a moment of utter consternation. Then he rushed
toward the sound of the scuffle there in the weird dark. The slithering
of his own feet betrayed him. There was a clanking rush in the gloom.
Cold metal claws closed firmly about his shoulders. He struggled. The
oxygen mask was scraped from his face. But the gripping members held
him firm at last, and he desisted in his futile efforts to escape.

"Who's there?" he growled, panting.

"It's me--Troubles," came the answer, half sobbing.

Perry Wilcox was stunned. "How did _you_ get here?"

"Same way you did," the girl choked. "When you ran away from the
hospital, I sent an orderly to follow you, and bring you back. He
didn't get to you; but he saw you dive off the dam with the oxygen mask
on. When he told me, I guessed right away what you were trying to do.
So--I got leave, found myself a mask in the operating room, and--tagged
after you."

"In the name of sense, _what for_?" Perry demanded.

"For a lot of good reasons--Mister!" she said more decisively. "I used
to be an ambitious newspaper woman, for one thing--always hunting up
trouble and hoping for a scoop. You can believe it's that way, if you
want to. Or you can believe that I'm the little girl that used to keep
clippings of all the Wilcox-Murgatroyd exploits, and that you're still
my hero--if you're conceited and crazy enough. I don't care!"

It was a torrent of words that would have startled Perry Wilcox if he
wasn't so amazed already, here in this dark hole of a place, with metal
monsters clutching him.

"Okay--Troubles," he stammered.

The robots restraining him were motionless. Nearby there were hollow
clankings. Trying to catch the significance of the sounds, Perry was
sure that the cover of the great vat was being raised. Cold prickles
raced over his body. What was it that would happen now?

Lyssa Arthurs was talking again, out of the dark. "Perry," she said
more gently, though just as intensely as before. "Just when I started
out it came over the radio that Kerwin was appointed Provisional
Director of Defense. And--and there's danger that the hospital will be
stormed by a mob--to get Murgatroyd."

Before he could answer, Perry felt his feet hoisted from the floor.
He was swung in metal arms, then tossed free. He flew through the air.
Warm fluid closed about him. It was like water, only it stung his
flesh--made his nerve-ends numb.

He heard the girl give a startled, involuntary cry, as she too splashed
into the strangely energized fluid in the great vat. Automatically he
tried to swim toward her; but the numbness was quickly creeping over
his nerves and muscles. He could hardly move.

His voice was hoarse with half paralysis when he choked: "Keep your
courage, Troubles...."

Perry's head went beneath the fluid. His brain was spinning. He thought
he heard a click of switches being turned on. The numbness increased
suddenly, like a jolt of electricity. But he managed to hold his
breath. He had a curious sensation of shrinking, of being pressed
together.

       *       *       *       *       *

He emerged at last from unconsciousness, knowing at least that he was
alive. He was coughing, as though his lungs had been partly full of
fluid. His head ached intolerably, and his heart was laboring like a
rusty engine.

He sat up on the wet surface on which he sprawled, and tried to look
about. His vision was blurred at first, and he squinted to focus his
eyes. He looked around a square room, one end of which was open. Its
walls were like rough, black glass. Behind him was a dark opening,
like a door, from which, judging from the wetness around him, he had
recently been ejected, along with a considerable quantity of fluid.

He saw the girl, Lyssa Arthurs, sprawled beside him. Worriedly, Perry
scrambled over to her. She was still unconscious, though breathing
raggedly. Her rubber oxygen mask was intact, except for the metal
and glass parts, which were curiously pitted and malformed. By some
unknown transformation the oxygen tanks strapped to her shoulders, were
similarly distorted and useless. They were full of holes, and had lost
their compressed content. Perry had parted with his mask during his
scuffle with the robots, and now his tanks had broken loose from his
shoulders somewhere too. He noticed that even the metal buttons of his
shirt were rough and out of shape.

He ripped the useless, ill-fitting mask from Troubles' face, unfastened
the crooked buckles that held the oxygen flasks in place, and applied
artificial respiration.

Meanwhile he searched his surroundings. What had been done to Troubles
and himself, and where had they been taken? He looked again toward
the open end of the compartment. Beyond was a gigantic, beautiful
cavern, apparently many miles in extent. It was walled with coarse,
jagged glass. Through a system of lenses in its azure roof, light was
streaming down. It must be artificial, but it was just about like
reddish sunlight. The floor of the cavern was like a beautiful, wild
valley, crowded with strange, exotic trees and plants; and white
buildings peeped through the foliage.

What had happened looked almost simple to Perry Wilcox then. He and
Troubles had merely passed down through the vat, to a vast, habitable,
artificially excavated cavern below. But he couldn't accept this
idea, somehow. It was _too_ simple. And there was an elusive
strangeness, disquieting and hard to identify, about everything he saw
and felt. It was more than just the oddity of the vegetation and the
buildings.

After a minute, Lyssa Arthurs sighed and tried to rise. She looked
about, confusedly. "Where are we?" she demanded.

"Your guess is as good as mine, Troubles," Perry returned, awedly. "But
we must be at the final center of things--at the place the robots up
there were meant to guard. Whatever that may be."

They rested several minutes, not saying much. Then Troubles arose
shakily. "Come on. Let's explore, fella," she urged.

Perry supported her unsteady steps as they walked out of the open-ended
chamber. The ground around them was covered with a kind of coarse,
shaggy moss. Trees, formed like oversized bushes, reared up over them,
bearing strange fruits. The light which came from above, was warm, like
sunshine.

"Kind of like a heaven here, isn't it?" the girl asked.

Perry grinned, though his head still ached. "What are you trying to do,
pull my leg?--talking that kind of bunk!" he growled.

"Only it's so still and deserted-looking," Lyssa went on. "There's not
a path anywhere. And look! That building!"

They had passed through a grove. Near them was a long structure of
white stone. But it was like a ruin. Its rows of windows, with their
carved decorations, some of them human figures, were sightless and
empty, except for intruding masses of coarse, vinelike plants. Once,
from its appearance, the building might have been a gigantic apartment
house, teeming with inhabitants. And there were others like it, near,
and far off on the high slopes of the cavern. But all had that same
tenantless aspect.

       *       *       *       *       *

Perry and Troubles were moving along a street of what might have been a
village. At the farther end of the street was a domed edifice of glass
of different colors.

And at the crest of the dome, standing firmly on a stubby cylinder
which was evidently meant to represent some sort of ship, was the
golden figure of a man, clad in flowing robes. The face of the colossus
was stern and kindly as he stared off into the distance as if somewhere
there he watched for the realization of a hope. The great staff he
clutched, rested on his pedestal and rose straight upward to join with
the roof of the cavern, above.

There was a steep stairway leading down to the sunken grounds of the
domed edifice. Lyssa, hurrying ahead on still unsteady legs, and
looking up too intently at the golden image above, lost her balance and
pitched forward on the steep slant. She tumbled the full length of it.
Perry gave a shout of concern and leaped after her, sure that she must
have at least broken some bones.

But she got up quite nimbly and promptly. "Stumble bum!" she muttered,
frowning. And then in a new and different kind of tone: "Perry--that
was funny, wasn't it? I'm not hurt at all!" There was wonder in her
dark eyes.

He was puffing with relief, but was startled, too. "Yeah, I see!" he
said. "It's stranger than the desertion, here. I landed light myself.
It was as though the air was holding me back--partly. As though it has
a higher resistance, or something! But that's looney!"

They walked into the temple. The atmosphere there was cool and moist.
Glass pillars, spiral in form, loomed in the shadows. Lyssa and Perry
looked around intently, as if searching for the answer to a riddle.

In an indented portion of the blue grass floor, there was a cluster
of spherical globes, crystal clear. They were maybe three inches in
diameter.

Idly, yet with an odd and very significant thought lurking in the
back of her mind, Lyssa kicked at one of the globes with her rough
shoe. Immediately it broke, coalescing liquidly with several of its
neighbors to form a slightly flattened ovoid. It was like a huge drop
of quicksilver in shape.

Lyssa was thinking deeply, but then Perry got her off the track. "Look,
Troubles!" he shouted. "The air resistance really is higher here!"

She turned her eyes toward where he pointed. Light shafted into the
room through the high, arching entrance. Surrounding semi-darkness
brought out the phenomenon plainly. Motes were floating in the path of
the light. And long, fibrous things, like lint. Only the motes were as
large as grains of sand, and the crooked strings of lint were as thick
as lead pencils!

"The air resistance would have to be higher, or the rate of its
molecular motion and bombardment would have to be a lot swifter than
usual, to support such big particles," said Perry. "But how can that
be? It seems the same old familiar air!" He halted, a startled scowl
crinkling his sunbleached eyebrows. "Say!" he drawled at last, mounting
incredulity in his tone. "Say!..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sensing that he was at the last barrier of the riddle that had begun
with his discovery of the great triangular outline in Minnesota hills,
he studied the glass walls around him. In the depths of their colored
substance, he could see large bubbles, and flaws of exaggerated size.
Then his gaze fell on the liquid, globular things that Troubles had
kicked. They looked exactly as though it was ordinary water that
composed them--as though they were dewdrops--except for their huge
dimensions.

"That's the funny thing we noticed, but couldn't quite place," Lyssa
offered. "That dew. That dust in the air. The flaws in glass. Such
stuff is all bigger than it should be, Perry. But what does that mean?"

Perry was thinking as fast and as hard as he could, then, trying to
put together all the puzzling pieces of his recent experience. Most
significant was the odd, tightening, _shrinking_ sensation, he had
felt, after the automatons had tossed him into the vat of liquid.

"Troubles," he said very slowly. "I--think--I've--got--it!
_We've--been--reduced--in--size!_ We're Lilliputians, maybe an
inch high, now! This cavern isn't the huge thing it seems to us.
Comparatively, it's a toy cavern. The buildings are toy buildings;
though they naturally seem gigantic to us, because we're so small too.
But dew and dust, relying on universal physical laws of nature, remain
normally--big!"

"But, Perry," she asked in the same awed tone he had used. "Is that
possible--that we've been shrunken, and still remain alive afterward?"

"Why not?" he questioned in response. "Everything is practically the
same--really--just scaled down.[1] Every cell in our bodies must have
been correspondingly shrunken, of course, so that there are as many
cells now as in the beginning. Otherwise we wouldn't be--ourselves. If
there weren't somewhere near the normal number of grey cells in our
brains, for instance, we'd lose our reasoning powers.

[Footnote 1: Judging from the vat in which Perry and Troubles were
reduced, the apparatus attached to it, and the sensations of being in
that green fluid, it would seem that the process of reduction is partly
electrical. Perhaps similar to electroplating--the drawing away of
substance from one electrode, and its transfer, in the form of ions,
to the opposite electrode. Each cell in Perry's and Troubles' bodies,
and in their clothing, could have been reduced that way. This isn't
so startling when reduced to prime factors. The human body is simply
chemicals. So are clothes. And life may be electrical in itself.--Ed.]

"We were thrown into the vat. Energy worked on us, drawing substance
away from each living cell--fat, protein, sugar, water--and the
cell-walls shrank, and we shrank with them. Our excess body substance
was perhaps absorbed by the green fluid, maybe being preserved for a
reversal of the process--a return to normal size. Only judging from
what happened to our metal buttons and things, the trick doesn't work
out very well for inorganic substances."

Perry halted, recalling something significant. "Remember how you fell
down those stairs up there, without being hurt at all, Troubles?" he
questioned. "That you weren't hurt is part of the relativity of being
small. Take a mouse and drop him from a high place, and his injury
doesn't amount to much. Drop a man from the same height, and he gets
all smashed up."[2]

[Footnote 2: For a given shape and density of material, the smaller an
object the higher the proportionate resistance it offers to the air.
This is because, in relation to its bulk, a small object has a greater
surface area than a large one. Hence, relatively more friction. Thus,
in air, a mouse might be expected to fall slightly slower than a man.

But this is not the most important reason why small objects are not as
easily damaged by proportionate forces as large objects. Take the model
of an ocean liner. It seems very firm and rigid. Build a full-size ship
under the same specifications--same steel, same relative thicknesses
and lengths. If it was possible to pick such a ship up from either end,
it would be in danger of breaking in two under its own weight!

Small objects are relatively stronger. In order to make a full-size
ship as strong as its model, the strength of the materials used would
have to be increased in proportion.--Ed.]

Lyssa Arthurs seemed to muse for a moment. "Yes," she said. "I see....
Whoever built the fortress must have built this miniature cavern before
they reduced their size, since this building is constructed all in one
piece, and not of blocks cemented together. And you wouldn't expect
little people to do that very readily. Then they came down through the
vat apparatus. But why, Perry? Why did they want to be small? What
advantage was there in it? Who were they?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Overhead, in the arching dome, Perry Wilcox noticed a picture. An ocean
washing a jagged shore. It looked just like a modern ocean. Only, in
the gorges between the jagged volcanic bluffs, there were bizarre,
fernlike trees, such as had existed in the Terrestrial Carboniferous
Period.

"I think," he said, "these people came from another planet. That ship
looks like a space ship."

"Do you really think so?"

"Yes, and it was a tough world for a raw bunch of colonists," Perry
went on. "So it was probably easier for them to make a small world
of their own. One they thought they could regulate and control.
Only--there was something wrong with it. That's why they're extinct."

"I guess you're right, Perry," the girl offered. "They built the
fortress. It was their first encampment, within which they could make
their preparations. Then, when they were ready to become small, they
covered it over to hide it. The automatons were sealed up, with special
apparatus to make them active--if there was danger--if some snooper
came around. For instance you, Perry. Our being sent down here, was
part of the plan too--captives or guests. Only the little people who
were supposed to receive us, have disappeared."

It was obviously true. The valley of the cavern looked deserted to its
farthest, verdure-clad reaches. The buildings, peeping white through
the green, were skeletally silent. There was no sound.

The desolation got on Perry Wilcox's nerves. The vast futility of the
mechanical debacle going on above. A dream that had soured. A science
of miracles that had followed a Will-o'-the-Wisp to a dead end. And
then Perry thought of something that changed his mood.

"They must have had a way to control the robots from here, Troubles,"
he said. "Everything else is too perfectly arranged for it to be
otherwise. They wouldn't just lock themselves down here, blind to
the upper world, would they? There must be a control room somewhere.
And logically it should be in this building, since it's the most
important-appearing one in the place."




                              CHAPTER V

                         Nemesis from the Tiny


Perry and Lyssa found what they were searching for at last, after
climbing a long, spiral stairs. The chamber was round, and was above
the dome of the temple, just beneath the representation of the space
ship and the golden statue of that ancient leader. The disk-shaped door
was fastened by a great hasp that was disengaged easily.

Wheels, meters, switches, charts. Never before had Perry Wilcox seen
such a staggering array. His heart sank. Could he ever master such a
complex arrangement in time to do any good--to stop the robots and
that vast, senseless conflict above? He tugged at one wheel. It turned
a very little, and a meter needle nearby jumped, showing that the
apparatus was still effective. But there the wheel stuck. It was locked
by a slight film of corrosion. Though things in this control room were
marvelously preserved, considering their titanic age, they had not been
protected by a time-defying vacuum.

Perry's face went sober and tired. "Even if these are the right
controls," he said, "it would take me a week and a lot of oil and
brain work to loosen 'em up and figure 'em out so I could turn off hell
up above."

Then his gaze centered on a mirror nearby. It was part of a periscope
arrangement which evidently communicated with the surface, its upper
end cleared of encumbering earth by the robots.

In the mirror was visible the slope of a hill, bright in after noon
sunshine. A solid array of army tanks were creeping up it laboriously.
Behind them, guns blazed. But down upon those attackers was pouring a
hail of death--of sharper, more violent explosions--that wiped out two
and three of the tanks at a time. Beyond, the plain was being filled
with a miasmic fog of death--corrosive gas. Still, the tanks came on,
each with its load of brave young men. Wave on wave, to destruction.

Perry stood watching for several moments. Viewed from the distance, the
tanks looked hardly bigger than they would have, had he been normal
size. His position was sort of a joke. He was standing where a general
from another planet should have stood while directing his guardian
robot army. But he was helpless.

"Kerwin is still at it," Perry remarked at last, his voice so
matter-of-fact that it was startling.

He was thinking bitterly of many things. Of the way plans were made,
hopefully, till they became faith. And then the disillusion of
miscarried results--of fact. Like this buried utopia. Its creators
had worked for its realization. They had achieved it, but they had
vanished. Like himself, and like Rod Murgatroyd. Rod, blinded, but
talking with hollow magnificence, of a strange heritage. Path of
Progress. The inspiration of a more ancient science to spur mankind on.
Oh, it sounded good, but it was all--screwy!

Wilcox blew up at last. "With Kerwin in control, Rod's probably already
dead--lynched by a mob!" he said. "And here we are, down here, a couple
of helpless peewees! I suppose we could go back to normal size--back
the same way we came here. There are controls there in the entrance
chamber. But what good would that do? We'd still be peewees!"

But Troubles was of a somewhat different attitude. "Maybe inch-high
peewees like us have advantages at that," she said significantly.
"Look, fella."

She was pointing to a slender, graceful object that rested in a metal
frame over their heads. It was very like an airplane, with short,
stubby wings. But instead of propellers it had rocket nozzles. Wheels
on its bottom, clung to a helical guide rail that spiraled upward
inside a great, vertical tube that must find its way to the surface
somewhere. Apparently the tube was the inside of the staff held by the
golden colossus above. And the staff penetrated the cavern's roof.

"Naturally, being as advanced in science as they were, those old people
would keep something to get about with, wouldn't they?" Troubles
questioned, as she climbed up the ladder to the craft's cabin entrance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Opening the door was a difficult thing; but Perry bounded up the rungs
and was helping her. He was ready to take his chances too, in spite of
his talk.

The door opened under the hammering pressure of his calloused palm.
There was space inside for two or three people to lie prone. The
controls were not unfamiliar. There was a joystick, and a second lever
which must take the place of rudder pedals.

Perry was wiggling, the control. They were stiff but not immovable.
With an eye of a practiced airman, he noted what they did to the tail
and wing fins. So far, so good. He turned a small valve on the dash.
There was a creaky, rhythmic sputter from behind. Evidently there was
still fuel in the tanks. In response to the brief rocket thrust, the
craft rolled a little way up the spiral guide rail. Then back to norm
as Perry returned the throttle to its original position.

"So what?" he said with a shrug. "Nothing funny about finding this
crate here. It's made of the same kind of evidently almost uncorrodable
metals as the instruments here in the control room. So it should last
forever. And the old-timers must have longed for the great outdoors
sometimes. That's logical enough. But there isn't the sign of a
weapon--nothing we could use to attack a giant. And Kerwin is a giant,
now, in relation to us!"

"How about bluff?" Troubles questioned, dimples of exasperation showing
at the corners of her mouth. "Come on, bonehead. Quit stalling! Haven't
you got any imagination at all?"

Wilcox grinned at her, startled and admiring. Her attitude gave him a
lifting sense of adventure. "Okay!" he drawled. "Funny, though--I used
to think you were a friend of Kerwin's. Of course, you could be trying
to pull a fast one yet, I suppose!"

"And I could knock that pug schnozzle of yours flatter than it is, for
that crack!" Troubles returned. "Come on! Let's see action--if you're
good enough to get any out of this thing!"

Perry opened the throttle. A little at first, then more and more. Speed
was built up. It became a dizzy whirl. Around and around that spiral
track, up and up....

       *       *       *       *       *

Lyman Kerwin sat in his office, topping the great Kerwin Building at
Chicago. Glass surrounded him--thick, green-tinted, bullet-proof glass.
Above him, beyond the metal-ribbed sky-panes of his eyrie, the star
blinked. Lyman Kerwin was studying the notes of the speech he was going
to deliver in five minutes.

Thoughts went racing through his fevered brain. Thoughts of
satisfaction and triumph. Here he was like a god, far up above the
rabble. What did it matter if a lot of them hated him, and mistrusted
his motives? They were afraid of what it was out there, not so many
hundreds of miles to the north-west. He'd see that they remained
frightened, as long as it was necessary.

They didn't know what he knew--what the poor fool, Professor Vince, had
found out--that the enemy were only machines, awesome in their powers,
but incapable of organized thought. Someday, when Vince had learned
more for him, and when there'd been enough fighting to give him full
control of the country, those robots would doubtless provide him with a
means of keeping his power in hand, even of extending it.

Lyman Kerwin arose from his chair and strode to the paneled cabinet in
the corner. He entered the cabinet and snapped on the brilliant lights
on either side of him. Facing him was a radio microphone and a pair of
lensed, television eyes. He had only to close a switch to make himself
visible and audible to the waiting world.

Above him was a mirror. Kerwin admired himself in it. He knew he wasn't
handsome--in any ordinary way, at least. It would be better, of course,
if he were young. But he looked like a master. He looked clever. Yes,
he _was_ clever! A genius! And his new, black uniform was slick,
becoming the role he must play. There was a badge on the coat lapel.
U.S. in black blocked letters, against a red background. And at the
center, in a gold star that was like a small, bright halo of glory, his
own initials in black--L.K. The badge was his own idea, and the jeweler
had wrought skillfully.

It was almost time for the speech, now. Kerwin turned about to get
his notes. He stopped in chagrin. The papers on his desk were burning
merrily! How they had become ignited, he couldn't imagine, since he
hadn't been smoking. It was unnerving. The first wave of fright went
through his cowardly soul as he bounded forward to brush the burning
papers to the floor, and stamp out the flames.

He hadn't seen the tiny, two-inch thing, like a miniature plane in
shape and function, that had come down through the ventilator above.
While his back was turned, it had darted toward the papers. Its atomic
rocket blasts, blue and almost invisible, yet terrifically hot,
had touched the litter on the desk. Now the minute intruder clung,
inactive, by means of anchoring claws, to the wallward side of an urn
of flowers atop a bookcase.

Kerwin shrugged his hunched, sloping shoulders. "I don't need the
notes," he thought, trying to reassure himself--trying to drive the
nameless, uncanny fear out of his heart.

He walked to the television cabinet and snapped the switches. It was
time to broadcast.

"My friends," he began. "Today we have started the big push against
the Murgatroyd-Wilcox Horror. It may be that hundreds of thousands
of men must die in the battle to hold this terrible enemy in check.
But this cannot be helped. I have tried to do my part. I appreciate
the great honor that has been bestowed upon me in making me Director
of Defense. But for efficiency, I cannot go on in this manner. There
is too much bickering among people who are not sincerely fighting
for the welfare of humanity. I must have the means to command, and if
necessary, silence these individuals. I must have full control of all
the nation's resources. In this emergency, not a moment must be wasted
in friction--in lack of cooperation. I have--"

Kerwin's small eyes were beginning to shine, but he stopped abruptly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Very near to him, he heard a tiny voice speaking. Its tones were like
the tinkling of minute flakes of glass. It was an impossible voice,
and yet a vaguely familiar one. Though it seemed close--almost at his
shoulder--still it seemed, too, to be shouted from a great distance:

"Interesting speech, Kerwin! Well planned! You've reached the crucial
point in your scheme, huh? All right! Go on! Don't hesitate!"

But Lyman Kerwin's words had broken off. He half turned. Then he
remembered his audience--millions of people observing his every move
by means of television. He didn't dare show any fear or disconcertion,
now! The rabble must believe in him. But a cold dew of terror was
breaking out on his bald pate and skinny cheeks.

"I have--I think--proved my worth," he continued, stammering into the
microphone. "I must not be hampered by--by the President of the United
States, and by--Congress. I--" Kerwin's voice was becoming a thin
squeak.

"What's the matter, Kerwin?" came taunting words in those thready,
elfin, confident tones. "Got stage fright or something? Don't act like
that! Pull yourself together! People will start laughing at you, first
thing you know!"

"I--" the crooked financier gurgled, struggling to go on with his
oratory from where he had left off; but nervousness seemed to have
strangled him.

And the unseen, pixy speaker went on: "Come now, Kerwin!" he was
chided. "This won't do at all! You're a big man, you know! You've sent
thousands of youth to their deaths already--just for your own glory.
You can't let everybody know you've got a yella streak a yard wide....
No, stop! Don't go turning off those switches! It happens we could kill
you in a split second. On the second thought, maybe it's just as well
folks see what goes on here. You wouldn't want anybody to be misled,
would you? There, that's better! Don't shiver so much. Don't turn. Just
stay where you are....

"That's probably a real good microphone you've got there, Kerwin.
It'll probably pick up even my voice, so everybody can hear it. I'm
not exactly just the voice of your conscience, you see. Nor am I so
easily ignored. By now many men know what you're up to, Kerwin. They
know about those robots--that they're only mechanical things intended
for defense. They've learned this fact in the front lines. But you've
been clever enough to keep them there, where they'd be killed quickly.
But we know more about this so-called 'Murgatroyd-Wilcox Horror' than
you or your scientists do, Kerwin. Because we've been--and so to speak
still are--_on the inside_!

"There's just one thing for me to say to the world, Kerwin. There isn't
time, right at this moment, for complete explanations. But I think many
people will anticipate my suggestion--that the army be withdrawn to a
distance of half a mile from its present entrenchments. I do not think
it will be attacked there. If we are given ten days to work--Miss Lyssa
Arthurs, late of the _Brenton Herald_, and myself, Perry Wilcox--I
think the trouble will be cleared up."

The little voice took on a sharper edge, as it addressed itself more
directly to the financier: "You can turn around now, Kerwin. I guess
it's the end, huh? They've seen you, they've got your number. They've
heard me talk. Maybe they're wondering what it's all about. Maybe
they're scared and uncertain. But one thing's sure--you're through.
You're a yellow fake, Kerwin...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly the financier pivoted on rubbery legs. His now bulging eyes saw
nothing but the great room, which was to have been the focus of his
empire.

Quivering with a horror that was part nameless and partly born of the
knowledge that he was an exposed enemy of society who could never
escape, Kerwin backed along the wall. He reached a window, and tugged
at its fastenings for air.

He gave a start as a low hiss sounded near him. Looking back, he saw
a little dartlike thing, spitting blue flame, and swinging close. It
had an ugly, alien look. He ducked it, screaming. With wild clawings
in which no reason remained, except to escape that devilish, hissing
unknown, he climbed to the window sill. There he toppled briefly,
babbling:

"I didn't mean it! No! Don't!..."

A moment later he pitched, with a wail of terror, toward the street far
below.

This time he hadn't heard two faint tinkly voices, shouting a belated
warning. Perry and Troubles hadn't meant to frighten him to this
extreme.

The plane flew back, alighting before the microphone, and in the path
of those television lenses. Two little doll-like beings descended
from the craft. For ten minutes Perry Wilcox talked, telling what had
happened; and the world saw and heard. Then he and his companion
returned to the plane. With a hiss it flew toward the ventilator in the
ceiling. And the city below, hummed in wonder.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were some doubts, of course; but the big push was stopped. A week
later, the army, watching from its new, rearward trenches, saw a sudden
cessation of motion on the citadel they faced. Most of the gleaming
Titans there, stood still in their tracks, as though frozen in the
morning sunshine.

Perry Wilcox and Lyssa Arthurs were pulled, inert, from the vat of
green liquid by attendant robots left active for the purpose. They had
submitted to the reversal of the process of decreased size, and now
they were normal again. After an hour they awoke. They passed through
the exit tunnel, and out into the open air. They climbed down the
silent slopes beyond the ramparts.

They reached the ragged, battered river flats, strewn with wreckage
and dotted with silent metal giants. Then someone hailed them. A tank,
piloted by a soldier, pulled close. Its turret opened, and a head was
thrust out. Perry saw a new Windsor tie, new checkered shirt, a thin
face, a bit blistered, and red hair, singed short--only, there was a
bandage over the eyes.

"Rod!" Perry gasped. "I thought--"

Old Roderick Murgatroyd laughed. "I know," he chuckled. "You thought
Kerwin's roustabouts lynched me. But when they stormed the hospital, I
wasn't there! Fooled 'em. Sneaked off. Then some newshounds cornered
me. But never mind that! See! I've got my newsreel rig!" He was
clutching the small camera strapped around his neck as he continued
plaintively: "I want to take some pictures, Perry. Darn, I can't wait
for my eyes to get better! Show me what's good. Path of Progress has
made its greatest hit. We've got to carry on, Perry...."

Wilcox' face was suddenly pained. But he kept his voice brisk. "Sure
we've got to carry on, Rod!" he enthused. "Hurry up and get out of that
tin wagon! There's at least a hundred battle automatons standing here
around us!"

"Hang the automatons," said the old scientist, jumping down lithely
with the guidance of Perry's hand. "I want a picture of you, first!"

"That means Troubles too, then," Perry shot back. "I think you'll be
buying wedding presents before very long!"

"Jupiter! That's swell! Now, let's see.... Just where are you?"

"Right here, Rod!" Lyssa said briskly, a small, unnoticeable catch in
her gay tone. "Standing close together. Shoot!"

They let him take his time, fumbling eagerly but clumsily with his
camera. And from his enthusiasm they drew many thoughts. He was a
little like the leader of those people from interstellar space, who had
built themselves a lovely, forbidden paradise in the small--a paradise
that native Earth men would never colonize, though there might soon be
found many uses even for the ionic science that had made it possible.
Exploration of places that full-size men could never reach. A miniature
secret service, perhaps.

The golden statue on the crest of the Pantheon, down there. Old Rod
belonged to that same class--an idealist. Nor could Perry Wilcox scoff
now, for he was one himself.

In the silence, Rod Murgatroyd's camera mechanism worked. In the
background, above the scarred slope, smoke arose silently from the vent
of a subterranean factory.

This was old Rod's moment of triumph. So Perry and Troubles could not
tell him that his eyes were gone.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TERROR OUT OF THE PAST ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


